 the 2016–17 income year when the company tax rate is 0.28 to receive tax credits of $224,000. The company tax rate changes to 0.30 for the 2017–18 tax year. Hemantware Ltd has a resulting deduction of $53,333 [$224,000 × (0.3 − 0.28) ÷ (0.3 × 0.28)] for that year. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 24.  Reinstatement of losses A cashed-out loss can be thought of as an interest-free loan from the Government to be repaid from the taxpayer’s future income; it is intended to provide a temporary cashflow timing benefit when the company is in a tax loss position only. Repayment of cashed-out losses will occur when a taxpayer pays tax on taxable income that would have been sheltered by the cashed-out losses if they had been carried forward. However, if the company or shareholders make an untaxed return on their investment before having repaid the value of the cashed-out loss, this would lead to a concessionary outcome for the taxpayer unless it triggered the repayment of some cashed-out losses. Consequently, loss recovery rules are included in s MX 7. These rules will recover the value of any remaining cashedout loss by way of the payment of R&D repayment tax when one of the following trigger events occur: ▪ the company: □ disposes of or transfers intellectual property, core technology, intangible property or know-how (ie obtains a return on their R&D investment through sale of a resulting asset) other than to the amalgamated company on an amalgamation and other than for consideration that is assessable income of the company and has a value no less than the market value of the property transferred □ becomes non-resident (for tax purposes), or □ has a liquidator appointed, or ▪ more than 90% of the company’s shares have been disposed of since the company first cashed out R&D tax losses. In the case of the disposal or transfer of R&D assets, the repayment tax is capped at the market value of the consideration for the disposal or transfer multiplied by the tax rate. That is, the R&D repayment tax is the lesser of any unrepaid R&D loss tax credits and  the market value of the transferred assets (intangibles’ market value), multiplied by the tax rate. Similarly, if the trigger event is a disposal of the company’s shares, the repayment tax is capped at the market value of the company’s voting or market value interests disposed of or transferred since the first tax loss was cashed out, multiplied by the tax rate. However, if the company either becomes non-resident or has a liquidator appointed, regardless of whether one of the other trigger events occurs in the same year, all of the cashed-out amounts must be repaid that year. In all cases, the repayment amount is reduced by income tax paid by the company from the time the losses were cashed out. The payment of income tax is a repayment of the cashed-out amount, as the company does not have the use of losses that have been extinguished to set off against that income. No further repayments will be required if the company has already derived sufficient taxable income to repay the balance of the cashed-out amounts before one of the trigger events occurs. The company is allowed a deduction under s DV 26 for the amount of the repayment tax divided by the company tax rate. The deduction is allocated to the income year in which the person incurs the repayment tax. Example 4: Taylortronics Ltd is incorporated in May 2015 to develop new guidance systems for munitions. It cashes out losses of $150,000 and $300,000 for the 2015–16 and 2016– 17 income years respectively. It receives tax credits of $42,000 and $84,000. It carries forward other losses of $50,000. In the 2017–18 year the company enters a manufacturing phase, selling trading stock to earn net income of $150,000. It has taxable income of $100,000 and pays income tax of $28,000. In the 2018–19 income year it sells know-how for $250,000 (which is a capital receipt) and also has taxable income of $80,000. The sale triggers a repayment event, because the receipt from the sale of the know-how was not assessable income for Taylortronics. Therefore, Taylortronics has to pay R&D repayment tax, as well as income tax of $22,400. The repayment tax is the lesser of: ▪ the market value of the R&D assets sold that year multiplied by the tax rate. This amount is $70,000 [$250,000 × 0.28], and  ▪ the unrepaid R&D loss tax credits. This amount is $75,600 [$42,000 + $84,000 − $28,000 − $22,400]. Therefore, Taylortronics pays R&D repayment tax of $70,000. In the 2019–20 income year the company has taxable income of $150,000 and pays income tax of $42,000. Unless Taylortronics cashes out further losses, no further repayments will be required from that time. R&D repayment tax and income tax payments made since the 2017–18 income year of $162,400 [$28,000 + $70,000 + $22,400 + $42,000] exceed the $126,000 [$42,000 + $84,000] of tax credits received for the 2015–16 and 2016–17 income years. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 25.  If there is a loss of continuity in the business and a liquidator is appointed and/or the company suffers a loss of eligibility, the loss of continuity does not give rise to R&D repayment tax. This is because the latter events require the balance of the R&D loss tax credit to be repaid in full as R&D repayment tax. The company will be liable for R&D repayment tax if the sale of intellectual property and a loss of business continuity occur in the same income year, as neither of these events may create a liability to repay the balance of the R&D loss tax credit in full. In the event of a loss of business continuity, all equity disposals and transfers from the year a credit was first taken up to and including the reinstatement year should be included in calculating R&D repayment tax. Imputation No credit balance will arise in an imputation credit account of a company that has cashed out a loss until that company has repaid the cashed-out amounts (whether through the normal payment of income tax or via R&D repayment tax). This is to maintain neutrality with taxpayers who are not able to cash out losses. However, cashing out a tax loss will not put a taxpayer’s imputation credit account into a debit balance. See s OB 47B. Example 5: R&D Biotics’ imputation credit account has a zero balance at the beginning of the 2015–16 year. R&D Biotics cashes out losses of $100,000 in the 2015–16 year and $125,000 in 2016–17, receiving tax credits of $28,000 and $35,000 respectively. R&D Biotics pays no tax for these years. R&D Biotics pays income tax of $22,400 in 2017–  18 and $35,000 in 2018–19. R&D Biotics will not have a credit balance in its imputation credit account for any of income years from 2015–16 to 2018–19 inclusive. This is because the amount cashed out has not been fully repaid by the end of the 2018–19 income year, with a balance of $5,600 remaining. R&D Biotics earns $150,000 in the 2019–20 income year and pays tax of $42,000. It will therefore have a credit balance of $36,400 for income tax paid for the 2019–20 income year (income tax of $42,000 − loss cash-out balance of $5,600). Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 28.  Administration Section 70C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) provides that a statement will have to be electronically filed for tax credits claimed for a tax year, as well as any R&D repayment tax that must be paid. The statement has to be filed no later than the last day on which a tax return is filed or the last day for filing the return was due, whichever is earliest. Any R&D repayment tax owing is due on the terminal tax date for the relevant tax year. The Commissioner is able to make an assessment of R&D repayment tax under s 97C of the TAA. COVID-19 variation On 24 June 2020, the Commissioner released a COVID-19 variation, COV 20/07, “Variation in relation to s 70C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to extend deadline for filing statements in relation to R&D loss tax credits” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 24). The variation recognizes that the impact of COVID-19 means that some taxpayers who would otherwise have filed a statement for the 2019 tax year on time have been unable to do so. Thus, the variation extends the date by which the statement under s 70C must be filed for the 2019 tax year to 31 August 2020. The R&D initiative is the joint responsibility of IR and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), so the Commissioner has information sharing powers with MBIE for these purposes. In addition, IR will use the Crown agency Callaghan Innovation expertise to help build capability to assess R&D expenditure and eligibility, and therefore also has such information sharing powers with Callaghan Innovation.  Law: IT07 subpart MX, ss DV 26, LA 7(1)(ab), LB 4B, OB 47B, YA 1, sch 22; TAA ss 70C, 97C  ¶10-855 Research and development tax credit Background In April 2018, the government released a discussion paper entitled “Fuelling innovation to transform our economy”. The document outlined proposals for a research and development tax incentive. Following submissions on the document, the Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Bill was introduced into Parliament on 25 October 2018 and enacted on 7 May 2019. The Act introduced a research and development tax credit to incentivise businesses to perform research and development and took effect from 1 April 2019 for the 2019–20 and later income years. The Act inserted subpart LY into the Income Tax Act 2007 to provide for a research and development tax credit (R&D tax credit) of 15% of eligible expenditure. The purpose of the R&D tax credit is to provide a tax credit as an incentive to a person for performing, or contracting for the performance of, activities to create new knowledge, or new or improved processes, services or goods. It is also intended to ensure that activities do not inappropriately qualify for R&D tax credits. Amendments were made to the rules by the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Act 2020, introduced into Parliament on 27 June 2019 and enacted on 23 March 2020. The primary amendments made by this Act related to the broadening of the refundability of research and development tax credits, ie replacing the previously enacted refundability rules with a single measure that caps the maximum amount of R&D tax credits paid out based on labour-related taxes. These amendments took effect from 1 April 2020, for the 2020–21 and later income years. However, these amendments were themselves amended by the COVID-19 Response (Taxation and Social Assistance Urgent Measures) Act 2020, enacted under urgency on 25 March 2020, as part of the government’s response to the COVID-19 virus. That Act brought the  application date of the broader refundability rules forward to the 2019–20 income year, ie the first year of the R&D tax credits regime. A summary of the rules, as amended, follows. All examples are taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 350 unless otherwise noted. Eligibility criteria Section LY 3 provides the general criteria a person must satisfy to be eligible for R&D tax credits. These criteria are in addition to the requirements that a person’s activities must be R&D activities and their expenditure must be eligible (discussed below). The general criteria require a person, or a joint venture of which the person is a member, to: ▪ perform a core R&D activity in New Zealand, either themselves or through an R&D contractor who carries on business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, and ▪ carry on a business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand (or be a levy body researcher, ie an industry organisation to which a levy is payable under New Zealand statute). Note that, before 1 April 2020, the criteria included a “non-business researcher”, which was defined similarly to a “levy body researcher” but also included a tax charity. In addition, either: ▪ the person, or a member of the person’s corporate group resident in New Zealand or in a jurisdiction with which New Zealand has a double tax agreement, or a joint venture of which the person is a member, must own the results of the relevant R&D activities, or ▪ the person or a joint venture of which the person is a member may use the results for no further consideration.  For the 2019–20 income year, if the person is part of the in-year approval pilot (discussed below), the R&D activity and the person must also be approved under the pilot provisions. For the 2020–21 and later income years, the person must also have approval under the general approval process or opt into the significant performer regime (discussed below). Ineligible persons A person is excluded from the R&D tax credit regime for an income year if they: ▪ fail to file an income tax return within one year of the latest date for them to file their return ▪ receive a Callaghan Innovation Growth Grant, or they are directly or indirectly controlled by, or associated with, a recipient of such a grant ▪ are an R&D contractor for another person in relation to the relevant R&D activity and that other person carries on business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ are, or are associated with or controlled by, a Crown research institute, district health board, tertiary education organisation (including a foreign tertiary education organisation) or Callaghan Innovation ▪ are a member of a joint venture or a partner in a partnership or an owner of an LTC, and they are not a New Zealand resident for the relevant tax year, or ▪ with effect from 1 April 2020, for the 2020–21 and later income years, are not a levy body researcher and derive exempt income under any of s CW 38 (Public authorities), CW 39 (Local authorities), CW 40 (Local and regional promotion bodies), CW 41 (Charities: Non-business income), CW 42 (Charities: Business income) or CW 55BA (Tertiary education institutions and subsidiaries).  Note that most entities that derive tax exempt income were initially eligible for the R&D tax credit but were made ineligible from the 2020–21 income year. Any credits received by these entities in the 2019–20 income year were not able to be carried forward to the 2020–21 income year and were instead extinguished (s LY 8(2B)). This applied to a person satisfying the last bullet point above, ie a person (other than a levy body researcher) who derived exempt income under any of the specified provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007. R&D activities R&D activities are defined to mean an activity that is a core research and development activity or a supporting research and development activity. A core R&D activity is defined as an activity that: ▪ is conducted using a systematic approach ▪ has a material purpose of creating new knowledge, or new or improved, processes, services, or goods, and ▪ has a material purpose of resolving scientific or technological uncertainty. However, an activity is excluded if the knowledge required to resolve the scientific or technological uncertainty is publicly available or deducible by a competent professional working in the relevant scientific or technological field. An activity is also excluded to the extent it is performed outside New Zealand or it is included in sch 21, pt A. A supporting R&D activity is defined as an activity that has the only or main purpose of, is required for, and integral to, conducting a person’s core R&D activity, but does not include an activity to the extent to which it is included in sch 21, pt B. The Commissioner has stated the following on the level of support required:  ▪ Mainly requires that the major purpose of a supporting activity is to support the core R&D activity. If the supporting activity is routinely carried out for another purpose, it is unlikely that its main purpose is to support the core R&D. ▪ Required for means a supporting activity must only be to the degree necessary to support the core activity. ▪ Integral to means that a supporting activity must be necessary to the core activity. That is, the core activity could not be performed or completed without the supporting activity. Schedule 21 exclusions Schedule 21 excludes certain activities from the core and supporting activity definitions. The table below summarises the exclusions and whether they apply to core and supporting activities. Activity exclusion  Core  Supporting  Preproduction activities, including demonstration of commercial viability and tooling up.  Excluded  Routine de-bugging of existing computer software.  Excluded  Supporting or making minor improvements to existing computer software, using known methods.  Excluded  Routine software and computer maintenance.  Excluded  Prospecting for, exploring for, or drilling for, minerals, petroleum, natural gas, or geothermal energy.  Excluded  Market research, market testing, market development or sales promotion, including consumer surveys.  Excluded  Activity exclusion  Core  Supporting  Commercial, legal, or administrative aspects of patenting, licensing, or other similar activities.  Excluded  Activities involved in complying with statutory requirements or standards for pre-existing processes, services, or goods.  Excluded  Activities involved in complying with statutory requirements or standards for new processes, services, or goods.  Excluded Included  Management studies.  Excluded  Activities relating to organisational design.  Excluded  Ineligible internal software development (discussed below).  Excluded  Research in social sciences, arts, or humanities.  Excluded Included  Quality control or routine testing of processes, services, or goods.  Excluded Included  Routine collection of information.  Excluded Included  Minor adaption of, or improvement to, existing processes, services, or goods.  Excluded Included  Testing.  Excluded Included  Converting existing systems to, or integrating existing systems with, new software platforms.  Excluded Included  Making cosmetic or stylistic chances to processes, services or goods.  Excluded Included  Activity exclusion  Core  Reproduction of a commercial product or process by a physical examination of an existing product or system, or from plans, blueprints, detailed specifications, or publicly available information.  Excluded Included  Carrying out routine operations on data, including presentation of data.  Excluded Included  If s 68CB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 applies, an activity that hasn’t been approved by the Commissioner under that section. (Note that this exclusion from being a supporting activity applies for the 2020–21 and later income years.)  Supporting  Excluded  The Governor-General has the ability to make changes to sch 21 on the joint recommendation of the Minister of Revenue and the Minister of Research, Science and Innovation. Any additions or removals by Orders in Council apply for the income year corresponding to the tax year after the tax year in which the order is made. Orders in Council will also expire three years after the last day of the tax year that the order first applies for. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes to clarify that the current exclusions for mining activities also cover development activities relating to prospecting for, exploring for, or drilling for, minerals, petroleum, natural gas or geothermal energy. Note that these amendments, as well as the other amendments to the R&D tax credit regime proposed by the Bill and discussed below, are intended to apply retrospectively from the 2019–20 income year, the original application date of the regime, unless otherwise stated. Ineligible internal software development  Certain internal software development activities are excluded from eligibility for the tax credit, while the remainder are subject to a cap on expenditure. The excluded activities are defined as “ineligible internal software development” as follows: ▪ software development for the purpose of the internal administration of a person’s business or an associate’s business, but ▪ does not include software development if and to the extent to which: □ it is for the main purpose of disposing of the software or a right to use the software to non-associated recipients □ the software is an integral part of goods that the person disposes of in the ordinary course of business, or □ the software is developed for the purpose of providing services, and the main reason why the recipients use the services is not the use of the person’s computer technology or software itself, but rather the services. Thus, software development of systems for internal administration matters, such as payroll, accounting, human resources, invoicing, etc, for use in the person’s, or an associate’s, business will be excluded (effectively capped at $0). Other expenditure on internal software development will be capped (discussed below). Eligible R&D expenditure Eligible research and development expenditure is defined as expenditure or loss described in sch 21B, pt A to the extent it is incurred on an R&D activity for the income year. It does not include expenditure or loss included in sch 21B, pt B or expenditure or loss subject to the commercial production rule (discussed below). ▸Note: The Bill also proposes a clarification to ensure that expenditure must be closely connected with conducting an R&D activity to be eligible expenditure. The proposed amendment will  amend the definition to provide that the expenditure must be required for, integral to, and directly related to, an R&D activity. The “directly relates to” requirement clarifies that expenditure must have a direct connection to an R&D activity to be eligible. A person must make a reasonable assessment of whether their expenditure has a sufficiently close connection to R&D to be eligible. If the expenditure relates to an R&D activity, but also relates to another purpose, the expenditure must be apportioned accordingly. The “required for” requirement clarifies that expenditure is only eligible to the degree it is necessary to support an R&D activity. The “integral to” requirement clarifies that expenditure must be essential to an R&D activity to be eligible. That is, the activity could not be performed or completed without the expenditure. The proposed changes are intended as clarification and are not intended to change how the expenditure rules work. Schedule 21B expenditure Part A of sch 21B provides that only the following expenditure or loss, to the extent the expenditure is incurred on R&D, is eligible for R&D tax credits: ▪ depreciation loss for items used in performing R&D activities ▪ expenditure or loss on acquiring non-depreciable goods and services that relate to performing an R&D activity (adjusted for the unused portion of prepaid expenditure), and ▪ amounts for employees that relates to performing an R&D activity. Part B of sch 21B provides that the following expenditure or loss is ineligible for R&D tax credits: ▪ amounts incurred by a person and their associates on R&D to the extent the amounts exceed $120m or their approved R&D cap (discussed below) ▪ expenditure incurred in acquiring depreciable property  ▸Note: The Bill also proposes inserting a new clause to exclude expenditure incurred in acquiring property that would be depreciable property in the absence of an election to treat it as non-depreciable under s EE 8. ▪ expenditure that contributes to the cost of depreciable tangible property if the property is not used solely in performing an R&D activity ▸Note: The Bill also proposes amendments to this “prototype exception” clause. First, the scope of the exception will be clarified by adding additional requirements that the property must only be intended for use in performing R&D in the future, and that creating the property must involve a core R&D activity. Second, a change is proposed to allow expenditure on employees doing core R&D activities to be eligible for the credit, despite the exclusion for costs that contribute to depreciable tangible property (the employee cost carve-in). ▪ depreciation loss for depreciable property to the extent to which the item’s cost is eligible R&D expenditure ▪ depreciation loss on items in a pool of depreciable property where an item in the pool is not used solely in performing an R&D activity ▪ depreciation loss arising from an asset being written off or sold below its adjusted tax value ▪ certain amounts of depreciation loss on assets acquired from associates ▪ profits on R&D services and property provided by associates ▪ amounts in excess of market value for leasing property from associates ▪ expenditure to purchase land  ▸Note: The Bill also proposes broadening the scope of the above exclusion by replacing “purchase” with “acquire”. ▪ interest and other financing costs ▪ professional fees in determining whether a person qualifies for R&D tax credits ▸Note: The Bill proposes changing the exclusion for professional fees to also cover in-house expenditure in determining whether a person qualifies for the tax credits. The Bill also proposes inserting a new clause to exclude expenditure incurred in performing corporate governance activities. ▪ expenditure to purchase, lease or acquire an interest in intangible property other than software ▪ expenditure to purchase, lease or otherwise acquire bespoke or customised software, or software not widely commercially available ▪ internal software development expenditure incurred by a person and their associates, to the extent it exceeds $25m ▪ expenditure on goods or services to the extent it exceeds the market value of the goods or services ▪ gifts ▪ expenditure incurred to acquire the right to use technology upon which a core R&D activity is based ▪ expenditure on plant, machinery or materials to commercialise the results of an R&D activity ▪ expenditure that relates to a government or local authority grant, but excluding expenditure funded through a loan made under the research and development loan scheme established by Ministerial direction to Callaghan Innovation under s 112 of the  Crown Entities Act 2004, notice number 2020-go2811 (“R&D loan scheme”) ▪ expenditure on inputs used, or subject to a process or transformation, to the extent the expenditure does not exceed the value of the output from that expenditure (feedstock rule) ▪ expenditure for which a person has received an R&D tax credit from another country, and ▪ if a person’s eligible expenditure is less than $50,000, expenditure or loss under $50,000 that is not for an approved research provider to perform an R&D activity on behalf of the person. ▸Note: The Bill also proposes inserting new clauses to clarify that expenditure on decommissioning, such as decommissioning plant, structures and sites, and expenditure on remediating land is not eligible for the R&D tax credit. The Governor-General has the ability to make changes to sch 21B on the joint recommendation of the Minister of Revenue and the Minister of Research, Science and Innovation. Any additions or removals by Orders in Council apply for the income year corresponding to the tax year after the tax year in which the order is made. Orders in Council will also expire three years after the last day of the tax year that the order first applies for. R&D activities performed in commercial production An alternate apportionment rule applies to expenditure incurred on R&D activities performed in the course of commercial production. If the R&D activity is performed in the course of commercial production and is not in relation to an employee’s contribution to an R&D activity, only expenditure or loss that would not have been incurred in the absence of the R&D activity will be eligible R&D expenditure. This rule is necessary to prevent business as usual expenditure being recharacterised as R&D expenditure. The rule does not apply to employee expenditure incurred on R&D activities performed in the  course of commercial production. A person can apportion expenditure on employees who perform both business as usual and R&D functions. Example 1: Activity in the course of commercial production JJ Co produces spa baths. The company makes improvements to its production line to try and make its water jets more energy efficient. The improved water jets are produced alongside the company’s regular water jets, and all of them are sold. JJ Co’s R&D activity occurs in the course of commercial production, because the more energy efficient jets are produced alongside its normal production.  Example 2: Activity not in the course of commercial production WindFuel produces sails for yachts. WindFuel is seeking to produce the world’s lightest and strongest sail for use in the America’s Cup. Between 9am and 5pm WindFuel produces its regular sails. From 5pm to 7pm the production line is dedicated to producing the new sails. These new sails will not be sold. WindFuel’s R&D activity is separate from its regular production line and the R&D activity itself is not commercial production because the sails will not be sold. The R&D activity does not take place in the course of commercial production, so the “to the extent” test applies instead of the commercial production rule.  Example 3: Additional expenditure Bert’s Biscuits Ltd is seeking to produce its best-selling product, the lettuce cracker (lettuce cracker 1.0), more efficiently, while still maintaining the same taste and shelflife (lettuce cracker 2.0). Activity not in course of commercial production – “to the extent” test In January, lettuce cracker 2.0 is developed in the firm’s test kitchen by a food technologist. Because this activity did not occur in the course of commercial production, expenditure is apportioned to the extent it is incurred on R&D. The following costs are eligible: ▪ Lease on building = $2,000 (this is 20% of the total lease cost, as the test kitchen is 20% of the floor area) ▪ Food technologist’s salary = $4,000 ▪ Raw materials = $5,000 ▪ Electricity = $150 (this is 15% of the total monthly bill for the factory. Because the test kitchen is not separately metered, it was apportioned based on a  reasonable estimate of appliance use and energy consumption use from manufacturers). Activity in the course of commercial production – additionality test In February, Bert’s Biscuits needed to determine whether lettuce cracker 2.0 was able to be replicated at scale so began production on one of its commercial production lines. This relies on adjusting production settings to ensure ingredients are combined in the right way and at the correct proportions. The firm is unsure what impact this will have on the production failure rate. Over the course of the month, the average failure rate was 10% (compared to a 2% failure rate for the lettuce cracker 1.0). The successful lettuce crackers were sold, which means the commercial production rule applies. The cost assessment is as follows: ▪ Lease on building = $0 (Bert’s Biscuits would have incurred this cost anyway in the absence of the R&D) ▪ Production staff salary = $2,000 (this is 20% of the staff cost and relates to the time staff spent supervising the trials, adjusting the production settings, hypothesising and investigating possible solutions to produce the lettuce cracker. The time the staff spent doing business-as-usual activities related to the production of the cracker is not eligible) ▪ Raw materials = $800 (8% of total cost of $10,000, which is the additional wastage from the R&D) ▪ Electricity = $80 (for the first half of the month, the electricity cost was not separately metered, and therefore Bert’s Biscuits is not able to claim any of the cost as it cannot show the additional cost. For the second half of the month, electricity meters were installed on all production lines. This shows the electricity costs on the R&D production line are 20% higher than usual. Apportioning the electricity, using this figure and taking into account floor area and the energy consumption of the other appliances in the building, gives a figure of $80).  Contracted expenditure Where a person pays an R&D contractor to perform R&D activities on their behalf, the following formula calculates the person’s eligible expenditure: contract amount – ineligible expenditure where: contract amount is the amount of consideration paid or payable by the person to a contractor to perform R&D activities  ineligible expenditure is the expenditure that would be the R&D contractor’s ineligible expenditure if the contractor were claiming the tax credits. A research and development contractor is a person who performs an R&D activity on behalf of another person, but does not include an industry organisation to which a levy is payable under a New Zealand statute. Example 4: Contracted expenditure Richard’s Rice Ltd is the largest producer of rice in New Zealand. Richard’s Rice Ltd is thinking of branching into desserts, and contracts Steph to produce rice that tastes like chocolate. Richard’s Rice Ltd pays Steph $1m to develop chocolate rice. Steph incurs $120,000 of expenditure that is ineligible under s LY 5. Richard’s Rice Ltd has the following eligible expenditure: $1,000,000 – $120,000 = $880,000 Example taken from the Commentary to the Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Bill  Note that if an amount of contracted R&D expenditure is also foreign R&D expenditure, the foreign R&D expenditure rules will apply to determine the amount of eligible expenditure. Foreign R&D expenditure Foreign research and development expenditure is defined as expenditure or loss that is: ▪ incurred on supporting R&D activities performed outside New Zealand ▪ a payment of salary or wages to a non-resident person for activities performed in New Zealand, or ▪ a payment for services performed by a non-resident person in New Zealand.  Eligible expenditure includes foreign R&D expenditure equal to the lesser of the person’s actual overseas expenditure and their capped overseas expenditure. A person’s actual overseas expenditure is calculated using the formula: contract amount – ineligible expenditure + foreign in-house amount where: contract amount is the amount paid to foreign contractors to perform R&D activities on a person’s behalf ineligible expenditure is the expenditure that would be the foreign contractor’s ineligible expenditure if they were the one claiming the tax credits foreign in-house amount is the foreign R&D expenditure incurred by a person on activities performed overseas that are not amounts paid to a foreign contractor. A person’s capped overseas expenditure is calculated using the formula: 0.1 x total NZ R&D expenditure ÷ 0.9 where: total NZ R&D expenditure is a person’s total eligible expenditure less any amounts of foreign R&D expenditure. Example 5: How foreign R&D expenditure is calculated A Co, a pharmaceutical company developing a cure for atrial fibrillation, incurs the following expenditure: ▪ $500,000 on researchers in New Zealand ▪ $100,000 on a non-resident researcher helping the team in New Zealand ▪ $200,000 conducting clinical trials overseas. $50,000 of this expense is ineligible as it relates to purchasing depreciable property.  Amount spent on foreign R&D = $250,000 (made up of the expenses on the nonresident researcher, and the eligible portion of the expenses relating to the clinical trials). The firm’s capped expenditure = 0.1 x 500,000 ÷ 0.9 = $55,556. This equates to 10% of their total eligible expenditure i.e. $55,556 ÷ 555,556 = 0.1 The firm’s eligible foreign expenditure = $55,556, which is the lesser of the amount the firm spent on foreign R&D ($250,000) and the capped amount ($55,556).  Internal software development excluded or capped As stated above, “ineligible internal software development” (being software development for the purpose of the internal administration of the person’s, or an associate’s, business) is an excluded activity and not eligible for the R&D tax credit. Other internal software development expenditure is only eligible up to a maximum of $25m. Internal software development expenditure is defined as expenditure incurred on developing software. It does not include such expenditure if: ▪ the person’s main purpose is to dispose of the software, or a right to use the software, to non-associated third parties ▪ the software is an integral part of goods the person disposes of in the ordinary course of business, or ▪ the expenditure is for ineligible internal software development. GST-related adjustments A person’s eligible expenditure is adjusted for GST in accordance with s DB 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (see ¶10-497). Example 6: GST input credit excluded from cost for R&D purposes Alison purchases $10,000 of oil for use in her R&D activities. As Alison is GST registered, she claims a GST input tax credit of $1,304.34, which is refunded to her by Inland Revenue. Alison’s eligible R&D expenditure is $8,695.66.  Example 7: GST adjustment deducted from eligible expenditure James purchased $20,000 worth of oil. He intended to only use 2/3 of the oil in his R&D process and take 1/3 home for private use. In the end, James used all the oil in his R&D process. James originally claimed GST of $1,739 (2/3 of $2,609). Because James used all the oil, he makes an adjustment to claim the remaining GST of $870. When James files his tax return and claims his R&D tax credit, the extra $870 must be deducted off his eligible expenditure to reflect that the true cost of the oil to his R&D was $17,391.  Calculating the tax credit A person’s R&D tax credit for a tax year is calculated as 15% of their total eligible R&D expenditure, subject to a minimum threshold and expenditure cap. Minimum threshold A person is only eligible for an R&D tax credit if they have at least $50,000 of eligible expenditure, or they have approved research provider (see below) expenditure. If a person does not satisfy the $50,000 threshold but has approved research provider expenditure, they are restricted to only claiming a credit in relation to their approved research provider expenditure. Example 8: The minimum threshold and approved research providers Hannah spends $10,000 on R&D. She also spends $25,000 for an approved research provider to undertake R&D on her behalf. Only $20,000 of this expenditure is eligible, once the ineligible expenditure of the approved research provider is taken out. Hannah may claim the $20,000 expenditure in relation to the approved research provider performing R&D on her behalf, but not the $10,000 on performing R&D herself, as her total eligible expenditure is only $30,000, which is under $50,000.  For members of a joint venture, partners in partnership and owners of look-through companies (LTCs), the minimum threshold can be satisfied by assessing the total eligible expenditure of the joint venture, partnership or LTC as a whole.  Example 9: Partners with less than $50,000 of eligible expenditure Emma and Luke are in partnership together. Emma has $20,000 of eligible expenditure, and Luke has $35,000 of eligible expenditure. Individually, Emma and Luke are unable to satisfy the minimum threshold. Since they are in partnership, their expenditure can be grouped (s LY 4(1)). As a result, Emma and Luke are able to satisfy the $50,000 minimum threshold. Example taken from the Commentary to the Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Bill  Expenditure cap A cap of $120m applies to a person’s total eligible R&D expenditure, so that the maximum credit available in any year is $18m. In addition, the capped figure includes expenditure claimed by the person’s associates, so that the combined claim of a person and their associates is limited to $120m (see sch 21B, pt B, cl 1). Example 10: Associated persons with expenditure in excess of the cap Muff Ltd and Mungnip Ltd are associated. Their combined R&D expenditure for the year ended 31 March 2022 totals $150m. They were not able to apply to exceed the $120m cap, because their R&D will not result in a substantial net benefit for New Zealand. Muff Ltd and Mungnip Ltd 31 March 2022 Claimant  R&D expenditure  Muff Ltd  $80m  Mungnip Ltd  $70m  Total  $150m  Muff Ltd filed its income tax and R&D supplementary returns on 1 October 2022. Mungnip Ltd intends to file its returns by 31 March 2023. The returns of both Muff Ltd and Mungnip Ltd are prepared by tax agents, so they both have an extension of time for their returns. Applying the aggregation rules in cl 1, sch 21B, pt B: Muff Ltd and Mungnip Ltd 31 March 2022 Description  Amount  Muff Ltd’s claimed expenditure (as returned)  $80m  Mungnip Ltd’s gross eligible expenditure  $70m  Total  $150m  Mungnip Ltd’s gross eligible expenditure  $70m  Mungnip Ltd’s ineligible expenditure ($150,000,000 less $120,000,000)  ($30m)  Mungnip Ltd’s net eligible expenditure  $40m  Mungnip Ltd’s eligible expenditure that it can claim in its income tax and R&D supplementary returns is $40m. This is because $80m (Muff Ltd’s claimed expenditure) plus $40m (Mungnip Ltd’s eligible expenditure) equals $120m. Example taken from the Commentary to the Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Bill  Approved R&D cap Taxpayers who expect to have more than $120m of eligible expenditure in an income year may apply under s 68CD of the TAA for the Commissioner to approve a cap in excess of $120m (an approved research and development cap). An application for an approved R&D cap must be made on or before the 7th day of the second month after the end of the income year (eg for a business whose income year ended on 31 March 2021, the application must be filed by 7 May 2021). The Commissioner cannot approve an approved R&D cap unless the relevant R&D activities give rise to a substantial net benefit for New Zealand and the Commissioner has first consulted with the chief executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. The information that is likely to be required to demonstrate a substantial net benefit for New Zealand includes: ▪ impacts on New Zealand-based economic activity ▪ impacts on job opportunities and skills of New Zealanders ▪ enhancements to market competition, efficiency, productivity, and service levels in New Zealand ▪ wider benefits to New Zealand, and  ▪ the durability and sustainability of the benefits to New Zealand. A person is prevented from challenging the Commissioner’s decision in relation to approving a cap in excess of $120m. Claiming the tax credit A person entitled to an R&D tax credit must file an R&D supplementary return for a tax year in a prescribed electronic format on or before the day that is 30 days after the due date they are required to file their income tax return for the tax year (or would be if they had assessable income): s 33E of the TAA. The Commissioner must prescribe one or more electronic formats in which an R&D supplementary return must be filed. The Commissioner may also set specifications for software for use in prepopulating the R&D supplementary return. Section 36BE of the TAA. Deadlines for filing and amending assessments A taxpayer’s ability to retrospectively claim an R&D tax credit is limited. A taxpayer must file their income tax return within one year after the due date for filing if they wish to claim an R&D tax credit. The Commissioner may not increase the amount of a person’s R&D tax credit after one year from the due date of the person’s tax income tax return, except if the increase is to take account of a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) initiated by the taxpayer under s 113E. ▸Note: The Bill proposes an amendment to also allow the Commissioner to adjust a person’s R&D tax credit claim upwards if the person has made a s 113 request within a year of their income tax return due date. Under s 113E, a person may only issue one NOPA in relation to an increase in a person’s R&D tax credit for a tax year before the earlier of four months after filing their income tax return for the year and one year after the due date to provide the return. In the case of a request  under s 113, a person may only make one request within one year after the due date to provide an income tax return for the year. A person is prevented from filing a NOPA or making a request under s 113 if they have not filed an R&D supplementary return within the time allowed under s 33E. Excess R&D tax credits If a person’s R&D tax credit is more than the person’s outstanding tax liability, the person may be able to obtain a refund of those credits or be able to carry them forward. Background The R&D tax credits regime was developed under tight timeframes, with insufficient time for comprehensive refundability rules to be developed before the relevant legislation was enacted. As a result, when the provisions were first introduced, limited refundability rules were put in place for the 2019–20 year (year 1). These rules were reviewed in 2019 and broader refundability rules were enacted and originally intended to apply for the 2020–21 (year 2) and later income years. However, as part of the government’s response to the COVID19 virus, the application date of the year 2 broader refundability rules was brought forward to year 1. The intention was to enable more businesses to access refundable R&D tax credits and to provide some businesses with larger refunds than they would have obtained under the previous year 1 limited rules. Note that while the broader rules now apply by default for year 1, a savings provision provides businesses with the option of using the previous year 1 limited refundability rules if they prefer (see discussion below). Refundability rules Under the refundability rules, loss-making businesses (or businesses with insufficient income tax to pay to offset their R&D tax credits against) can be eligible for R&D tax credit refunds provided they are eligible for the tax credit more generally. The amount of R&D tax credits that may be refunded is subject to a labour-related tax cap. When a claimant is unable to offset all of their R&D tax credits against their income tax liability, the maximum amount of refundable  R&D tax credits the person may claim in an income year is the lesser of: ▪ the amount of PAYE, fringe benefit tax (FBT) and employer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) paid by the person for the relevant income year, and ▪ the amount of R&D tax credits claimed by the person. The refundability cap does not apply to refundable R&D tax credits paid to levy body researchers or derived from eligible expenditure on approved research providers. Example 11: Insufficient payroll taxes paid to refund all credits In the year ended 31 March 2022, Bags & Archie Ltd (BAL) has eligible R&D expenditure of $1,000,000, so is eligible for $150,000 of R&D tax credits. BAL has no income tax liability to offset its R&D tax credits against. BAL has 5 full-time employees and has paid a total of $100,000 in PAYE, ESCT and FBT for these employees. BAL is only able to receive an R&D tax credit refund of $100,000, because its R&D tax credits are more than its total of relevant taxes paid for the year. Its remaining $50,000 of R&D tax credits must be carried forward to the 2022–23 income year. Bags & Archie Ltd – 31 March 2022 Eligible R&D expenditure  $1,000,000 × 15%  R&D tax credits claimed  $150,000  Income tax liability  $0  Remaining R&D tax credits*  $150,000  Total PAYE, ESCT and FBT paid  $100,000  Remaining R&D tax credits*  $150,000  R&D tax credits refunded  $100,000  R&D tax credits carried forward to 2022–23  $50,000  *After offsetting against income tax payable. Example adapted from the Commentary to the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill  The refundability cap includes PAYE, ESCT and FBT allocated to the claimant that have been paid by other companies either in the same wholly-owned group or that directly or indirectly control the claimant. Sections LA 5(5B) and (5C) provide the formula for calculating the refundability cap: own tax + other wholly-owned tax + other controller tax – double dip allocation where: own tax is the total PAYE, ESCT and FBT paid by a claimant for the relevant tax year to the extent to which it has not been allocated to another claimant other wholly-owned tax is zero or, if the claimant is a company and a member of a wholly-owned group of companies, the amount of PAYE, ESCT and FBT paid by members of the claimant’s wholly-owned group and allocated to the claimant for the relevant tax year other controller tax is zero or, if the claimant is a company, the amount of PAYE, ESCT and FBT paid by companies that control the claimant and allocated to the claimant for the relevant tax year, and double-dip allocation is the amount allocated to the claimant that has already been allocated to another person for the purposes of calculating their refundability cap for the tax year. Any non-refundable R&D tax credits will be able to be carried forward to the next income year provided the shareholder continuity requirements in s LY 8 are met. Example 12: R&D company controlled by another company R&D Co is an R&D-intensive firm that is eligible for $300,000 of R&D tax credits in the 2021–22 income year. R&D Co is in a tax loss position, so does not have any income tax liability to offset its R&D tax credits against.  R&D Co pays $50,000 of PAYE, ESCT and FBT for the 2021–22 income year. The $50,000 is considered “own tax” for the purposes of the formula. R&D Co is in the same wholly-owned group as B Co. B Co pays PAYE, ESCT and FBT of $200,000 in the 2021–22 income year. B Co allocates $100,000 of this amount to R&D Co for the purposes of calculating R&D Co’s refundability cap. B Co does not allocate the PAYE, ESCT and FBT amount to any other companies, and does not use the $100,000 for the purposes of calculating its own refundability cap. The $100,000 is considered “other wholly-owned tax” for the purposes of the formula. R&D Co is controlled by A Co, which owns 65% of the shares in R&D Co. A Co pays PAYE, ESCT and FBT of $100,000 for the 2021–22 income year. A Co does not claim any R&D tax credits in the 2021–22 income year, so it decides to allocate all of its PAYE, ESCT and FBT ($100,000) to R&D Co for the purposes of calculating R&D Co’s refundability cap. A Co does not allocate its PAYE, ESCT and FBT to any other companies. The $100,000 is considered “other controller tax” for the purposes of the formula. In summary, R&D Co’s refundability cap is made up of these amounts: ▪ Own tax: $50,000. ▪ Other wholly-owned tax: $100,000. ▪ Other controller tax: $100,000. ▪ Double dip allocation: $0. Applying the formula: $50,000 + $100,000 + $100,000 − $0 = $250,000 Since R&D Co has a refundability cap of $250,000, it can obtain an R&D tax credit refund for $250,000 of its credits. Its remaining $50,000 of R&D tax credits are nonrefundable in the 2021–22 income year. R&D Co can carry its non-refundable credits forward to the 2022–23 income year provided it satisfies the R&D tax credit shareholder continuity requirements. Example adapted from the Commentary to the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill.  Carrying forward tax credits A person’s R&D tax credits that are not refunded under s LA 5(4B) may be carried forward to the following year. If the person is a company, the company must meet the shareholder continuity requirements to carry forward the tax credits. The continuity requirements are the same as the current requirement to carry forward losses (see ¶18-023), ie there must be a 49% shareholder continuity from the beginning of the year in which the R&D tax  credits arise to the end of the year the credits are carried forward to. Part-year continuity rules similar to those applying to tax losses (see ¶18-025) also apply to allow credits to be carried forward when continuity is breached during the year. R&D tax credits that are carried forward are used before credits from the current year. This minimises the potential credit loss following a shareholding change. Optional year 1 limited refundable tax credits Section LZ 14 sets out the limited refundability rules that businesses can choose to apply for year 1 if they prefer. The section provides that a company’s R&D tax credits will be refundable if the company: ▪ is in a tax loss position, or has insufficient income tax liability to utilise all of its R&D tax credits in the 2019–20 income year ▪ satisfies the R&D tax loss cash-out corporate eligibility and wage intensity criteria in ss MX 2 and MX 3 (see ¶10-853), and ▪ does not derive exempt income (ignoring exempt income under ss CW 9 and CW 10 — foreign dividends and dividends within New Zealand wholly-owned group) and is not associated with a person who derives exempt income. Only the first $255,000 of the company’s R&D tax credits is refundable, which is the equivalent of $1.7m of eligible expenditure. Any remaining R&D tax credits may be carried forward to the 2020– 21 income year if eligible for that year and provided the shareholder continuity requirements in s LY 8 are met. Anti-avoidance rule An anti-avoidance rule applies when an arrangement has a more than merely incidental purpose or effect of defeating the intent and application of the R&D tax credit legislation in subpart LY. Under the rule, the Commissioner may reduce the person’s entitlement to the R&D tax credit to the amount the Commissioner  thinks appropriate. This applies whether or not the person is a party to the arrangement. Other matters Approved research providers A person can apply for the Commissioner’s approval to be an approved research provider: s 124ZH of the TAA. The Commissioner will only approve a person if, in the Commissioner’s opinion, the person: ▪ is capable of performing core R&D activities on behalf of other people ▪ has facilities in New Zealand needed to perform core R&D activities ▪ is available to perform core R&D activities on behalf of third parties, and ▪ performs, or will perform, core R&D activities for other people for market value consideration. On granting approval, the Commissioner must notify the person and publish the approval. The Commissioner also has a discretion to revoke approval, but if she does, she must give the person reasons for the exercise of her discretion and specify the date from which the revocation takes effect. Provisional tax A person’s R&D tax credit will reduce their future provisional tax payments. The definition of “residual income tax” has been amended so that R&D tax credits are taken into account. Imputation and Māori authority credits A company has an imputation credit for the amount of R&D tax credits the company is entitled to: s OB 9C. In addition, a consolidated imputation group has an imputation credit for the amount of R&D tax credits the group company is entitled to: s OP  11C. A Māori authority has a Māori authority credit for the amount of R&D tax credits the Māori authority is entitled to: s OK 6C. The imputation credit or Māori authority credit, as applicable, is credited on the day the relevant entity files its return for the income year. The use of the words “entitled to” ensures that if a R&D tax credit is reassessed downward, the amount of the imputation credit or Māori authority credit will also be adjusted. Record keeping Persons who receive an R&D tax credit must keep sufficient records to support their claim. Approved research providers must keep sufficient records to show they meet the requirements to be an approved research provider, as well as the amounts derived and incurred by them in performing R&D activities on behalf of other persons. Records need to be kept for seven years. Publication of details of tax credits The Commissioner is required to publish the names of people who have received an R&D tax credit and where the amount of their tax credit falls for a tax year, using appropriate dollar bands. However, publication cannot take place before two years after the end of the tax year to which the relevant tax credit relates. See s 68CE of the TAA. Proscribed question for binding ruling Taxpayers are unable to obtain binding rulings for any question related to R&D tax credits. Extension of promoter penalty regime The promoter penalty regime (see ¶14-123) is extended by including a person providing services on a contingency fee basis in relation to R&D tax credit claims within the definition of promoter. In addition, the definition has been amended to include a person party to, or significantly involved in, formulating software from which an arrangement is offered. A promoter penalty will therefore apply where a person has offered 10 or more contingency fee arrangements in relation to R&D tax  credit claims and one or more of the person’s clients has been subject to a shortfall penalty for abusive tax position in relation to that arrangement. A promoter penalty will also apply where a person has offered an arrangement involving the use of software that calculates R&D claims to 10 or more people, and one or more of these people has become liable to a shortfall penalty for abusive tax position as a result of the R&D credit calculation undertaken as a result of the arrangement. Information sharing Exceptions to the secrecy provisions ensure Inland Revenue is able to communicate information to officers, employees or agents of the Treasury, Callaghan Innovation, MBIE or other state sector entities for evaluating, administering, reporting statistics on, and forming the policy for the R&D tax credit regime. In addition, the Commissioner may communicate to an officer, employee or agent of Callaghan Innovation or MBIE information reasonably necessary for that person to perform their work in relation to: ▪ offering R&D advice and incentives, including tax incentives, grants, loans, and any related measures aimed at incentivising R&D ▪ the grant and administration of a loan made under the R&D loan scheme. The Commissioner may also allow an officer, employee or agent of Callaghan Innovation access to information reasonably necessary for that person to perform their work in relation to administering tax credits provided in subparts LY and MX. Reporting on tax credit The Minister of Research, Science and Innovation has to undertake an objective and independent evaluation of the R&D tax credit regime as soon as practicable after the end of the 2023–24 tax year and every five years subsequent. In-year approval and significant performer regime from the 2020–21 income year  With effect from 1 April 2020, for the 2020–21 and later income years, all persons (including LTCs and partnerships) are required to obtain approval of their R&D activities under s 68CB (general approval process) or 68CC (significant performer regime). Each is discussed below. Note that a pilot programme for both the in-year approval mechanisms (the general approval process and the significant performer regime) was provided for in the 2019–20 income year. This pilot programme was instituted for a representative group of taxpayers agreed by the Commissioner. This was to allow IR to work through and improve the processes before they were rolled out to all claimants in the 2020–21 income year. The key requirements of the pilot programme were the same as those discussed below, but the approvals applied only for the 2019–20 income year. A decision made by the Commissioner under either of these mechanisms cannot be challenged, except through judicial review. General approval process The default rule is in s 68CB, which requires anyone intending to apply for an R&D tax credit for an income year to obtain approval of their R&D activities (general approval). General approval can last for up to three income years. Applications for approval must be made by the seventh day of the second month after the end of the relevant income year. For a person with a standard balance date with eligible R&D expenditure in the year ended 31 March 2021, the person would need to apply for general approval by 7 May 2021. ▸Note: For the 2020–21 income year, the Commissioner has extended the period in which applications for approval must be made by three months to the seventh day of the fifth month after the end of the income year. This applies in circumstances where the planning or conduct of eligible R&D or the ability to appropriately obtain necessary information, seek advice and formulate an application under s 68CB on time has been materially delayed or disrupted by the COVID-19 outbreak and its effects. The extension has been  made under a COVID-19 variation determination and applies from 1 September 2020 to 30 September 2021. See COV 20/10, “Variation of section 68CB(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 9, October 2020 at 9). Applications for general approval must set out the activities a person wants approved as R&D activities, the income years the person wants the general approval to apply for, and any other information required by the Commissioner. Once general approval is granted, the Commissioner must notify the person which activities are approved as core R&D activities or supporting R&D activities, the income years for which the general approval applies, and any conditions of the general approval. The Commissioner must notify the person of her intention to decline an application before the application is declined. This will allow the person the opportunity to provide additional information if required. The Commissioner’s decision to approve or reject a general approval application cannot be challenged. Once the Commissioner has approved the activities, the person’s activities are approved for the income year provided: ▪ a person’s application is accurate ▪ the person satisfies any conditions of the general approval that have been set by the Commissioner, and ▪ there is no change to subpart LY (and any associated provisions) that materially alters the basis on which the general approval was provided. If the Commissioner has provided general approval for more than one income year, then the person must provide the Commissioner with confirmation on or before the seventh day of the second month after the end of the income year that there has not been any material changes for their business. A person can apply to vary an existing general approval if their circumstances change. An application to do this must be submitted by the seventh day of the second month after the end of the relevant  income year (which is the same application deadline for new general approval applications). Without general approval, a person will not be able to obtain R&D tax credits for an income year, unless they satisfy the requirements of, and choose to apply, the significant performer regime in s 68CC. General approval is binding on the Commissioner. Significant performer regime An alternative to the general approval process, the significant performer regime is available to persons who have, or reasonably estimate that they will have, more than $2m of eligible R&D expenditure for the relevant income year. The expenditure of partners in partnership, members of a joint venture, as well as companies in the same group of companies, can be grouped when determining this. People who opt into the significant performer regime are not able to obtain general approval of their R&D activities. R&D certificates and certifiers If a person opts into the significant performer regime, they are required to supply the Commissioner with an R&D certificate alongside their R&D supplementary return. The information R&D certificates must contain is not prescribed by legislation, but it is expected that R&D certificates will confirm that: ▪ an R&D certifier (typically a law or accounting firm) has reviewed a sample of a person’s eligible R&D expenditure ▪ the expenditure sample reviewed by the R&D certifier was calculated in accordance with the R&D tax credit rules, and ▪ the person actually incurred, or was reasonable in estimating that they would incur, more than $2m of eligible R&D expenditure in the relevant income year. Section 124ZI sets out the requirements for R&D certificates and accepted R&D certifiers. A person is an accepted R&D certifier if  they: ▪ have requested approval from the Commissioner in the prescribed form ▪ have not had their R&D certifier approval revoked in the last two years ▪ have not surrendered their approval in the last two years, if the surrender was in anticipation of a revocation ▪ have made a statutory declaration that they are competent in applying appropriate accounting and legal standards in relation to R&D tax credits ▪ have declared any other matters the Commissioner requires them to declare for assuring the Commissioner that they have the legal, accounting, and scientific expertise to complete R&D certificates, and ▪ the Commissioner approves their application. The Commissioner must not approve a person whose approval would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. Once the Commissioner approves a person’s application to be an accepted R&D certifier, the Commissioner must notify the person and publish the approval in a publication chosen by the Commissioner. The approval starts from the date the person requests approval. The Commissioner is able to revoke approval of an accepted R&D certifier at her discretion. If approval is revoked, this must be published in a publication chosen by the Commissioner. The revocation starts from the date the revocation is published. If an accepted R&D certifier provides an R&D certificate to another person who has, in the two years before the income year, been liable to a shortfall penalty under s 141D (Abusive tax position) or 141E (Evasion or similar act) or entered into a tax avoidance arrangement  in relation to R&D tax credits, the Commissioner must revoke the R&D certifier’s approval. The Commissioner must also revoke a person’s approval if the person is liable for a promoter penalty under s 141EB or the person’s approval would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. The Commissioner’s decision to approve, decline to approve, or revoke the approval of an R&D certifier cannot be challenged. Criteria and methodologies approval People who opt into the significant performer regime are able to apply for criteria and methodologies approval (CAM approval). Applications for CAM approval must detail: ▪ the criteria and methodologies the person wants the Commissioner to approve ▪ the income years the CAM approval will apply for, and ▪ any other information required by the Commissioner. The Commissioner is able to approve appropriate criteria and methodologies that the person can use to determine whether their R&D activities and expenditure are eligible. The Commissioner may approve a person’s criteria and methodologies for an income year and up to two further consecutive income years, provided the person makes an application on or before the seventh day of the second month after the end of the first income year. ▸Note: The Bill proposes an amendment to bring forward the due date for submitting an application for CAM approval to the last day of the sixth month before the end of the first income year. The amendment is intended to apply for the 2021–22 and later income years. Once CAM approval is granted, the Commissioner must notify the person of those criteria and methodologies the Commissioner approves of, the period for which the CAM approval applies, and any conditions of the CAM approval. The Commissioner must notify the person of her intention to decline an application before the  application is declined. This will allow the person the opportunity to provide additional information if required. Once the Commissioner has approved the criteria and methodologies, they are approved for the person for the income year provided: ▪ a person’s application is accurate ▪ the person satisfies any conditions of the CAM approval that have been imposed by the Commissioner ▪ there is no change to subpart LY (and any associated provisions) that materially alters the basis on which the CAM approval was provided, and ▪ the person satisfies the other requirements of the significant performer regime (that is, the person satisfies the $2m threshold and supplies an R&D certificate alongside their R&D supplementary return). The Commissioner can revoke a criteria approval from the beginning of an income year if she considers that a person has classified their activities or expenditure in a way that defeats the purpose and application of the R&D tax credit regime. The Commissioner’s decision to approve, decline to approve, or revoke a criteria approval cannot be challenged. Guidance on R&D Tax Credit The regime, as originally enacted, is discussed in detail in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 3–50. In April 2020, IR released IR 1240, “Research and development tax incentive: Guidance”. The Guidance covers all aspects of the R&D tax credit and is available on the IR website. The Guidance has been updated to include materials relating to the changes made by the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Act 2020, including the introduction of the broader refundability rules. It reiterates the policy intent from the Tax Information Bulletin and  includes the latest news on the operational design, including a PDF of screens from the R&D Tax Incentive supplementary return. Law: IT07 subpart LY, ss LZ 13, LZ 14, YA 1, sch 21, sch 21B; TAA ss 33E, 36BE, 68CB–68CE, 89DA(1)(ab), 108(1E), 113E, 124ZH, 124ZI, 138E(1)  ¶10-860 Deductibility of resource consent applications Unsuccessful and aborted applications for resource consents A deduction is allowed for expenditure incurred in making an unsuccessful application for the grant of a resource consent. The application must have been made and then withdrawn or rejected and the expenditure must be such that it would have been part of the cost of depreciable property, or otherwise allowed as a deduction, if the application had been granted. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which the application is withdrawn or rejected. A deduction is also allowed where a taxpayer incurs expenditure on an intended application for a resource consent that they decide not to lodge or on a grant that is obtained but not used before it lapses or is surrendered. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which the taxpayer decides not to lodge the application, withdraws the application or is refused the grant, or the income year in which the resource consent lapses or is surrendered. In addition, s CG 7B provides that deductions that have been taken for an aborted or unsuccessful application for the grant of a resource consent are clawed back as income if the taxpayer subsequently disposes of the abandoned application property or uses it in obtaining the grant of a resource consent. In the latter case, the clawed back amount is included in the cost of the intangible property to be depreciated over the life of the depreciable asset. Interpretation statement on resource consent expenditure In November 2018, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement, IS 18/06, “Income tax — treatment of costs of resource  consents” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 11, December 2018 at 10). The statement discusses whether deductions for the expenditure incurred in obtaining environmental and land consents are available and on what basis. The ability to deduct or depreciate expenditure on a resource consent depends on the type of expenditure, the type of consent and the resulting asset. See further at ¶13-585. In relation to the application of s DB 19, the statement emphasises that s DB 19 does not allow a deduction when the costs would not have been depreciable or otherwise deductible. This means: ▪ s DB 19 applies to environmental consents because they are always capable of being depreciated ▪ deductibility of expenditure on land consents depends on whether the cost would have been deductible if the project went ahead, ie s DB 19 will apply where the expenditure would have been depreciable as a cost of an item of depreciable property. Law: IT07 ss CG 7B, DB 19  ¶10-870 Deduction for payment of restitution A payment of restitution is allowed as a deduction where the stolen property had given rise to an item of assessable income. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which the restitution is made. Law: IT07 s DB 44  ¶10-880 Deductibility of payment made for restrictive covenant breach An employee who receives an assessable receipt for a restrictive covenant, and who subsequently becomes liable to pay compensation for a breach of his or her undertaking, is allowed a deduction for the amount paid. The amount of the deduction cannot  exceed the receipt for the restrictive covenant that was previously part of the employee’s assessable income. The deduction is allowed in the year in which the payment is made. Law: IT07 s DB 48  ¶10-885 Deductibility of seismic assessment costs In December 2016, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/08, “Income tax — deductibility of the costs of obtaining a detailed seismic assessment of a building” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 1, February 2017 at 3), which considers whether the cost of obtaining a detailed seismic assessment (DSA) on a building is deductible. Following the release of the Supreme Court decision in Trustpower Ltd v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-061 (see ¶10-440), the Commissioner reconsidered the original draft of the item and broadened the item’s scope and acknowledges there are many circumstances in which a DSA might be sought. The item also acknowledges that in most circumstances the cost of obtaining a DSA will be deductible. A DSA is most commonly obtained when a city or district council has identified a building as potentially earthquake prone. An earthquakeprone building is often described as one that has an earthquake rating of less than 34% of the new building standard. The Earthquake-prone Buildings Amendment Act 2016 requires city and district councils to actively identify and require owners to take action on earthquake-prone buildings. A DSA may also need to be obtained when a building consent is required under the Building Act 2004 to alter a building (s 112 of the Building Act). It may also be required when the use of a building changes (s 115 of the Building Act). Taxpayers may also choose to obtain a DSA: ▪ as part of a project to seismically strengthen a building ▪ to satisfy existing or potential tenants of a building’s safety  ▪ to get insurance or to reduce insurance premiums ▪ to identify possible damage after an earthquake ▪ to evaluate the safety of someone else’s building where the safety of that building may impact on the taxpayer’s business. The Commissioner considers that, from a practical or business point of view, expenditure on a DSA in the situations described above is incurred to obtain information so as to determine whether a building is earthquake prone (and by how much it fails or exceeds the required standard). Such expenditure should be treated as revenue in nature and deductible. However, the exception is where a DSA is obtained as part of a capital project (such as a capital project to seismically strengthen a building), in which case the costs will be capital in nature and non-deductible. The item covers DSA costs incurred by taxpayers who are in the business of renting out commercial or residential buildings, who own buildings used for their own businesses, and who get DSAs on someone else’s building where the safety of that building may impact on the taxpayer’s business. Note that the Commissioner also states that the same considerations and conclusions will apply to the costs of other less detailed seismic assessments (including initial seismic assessments) when they are obtained by taxpayers in the same situations as those identified in the item.  ¶10-900 Deductibility of payments to spouse, civil union or de facto partner No deduction is allowed for a payment by a taxpayer to his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner unless approved by the Commissioner before the deduction is claimed. In the case of a payment for services, before approving the deduction, the Commissioner must be satisfied that the payment is for services rendered, not being domestic services or other services connected with the home, and is incurred exclusively in the derivation of the taxpayer’s assessable income. For a payment for something other  than services, the Commissioner must be satisfied that the payment is genuine, as well as incurred exclusively in deriving assessable income. The Commissioner is further authorised to disallow the deduction claimed to the extent that it is regarded as excessive. See ¶23-142. The usual practice is to obtain the Commissioner’s agreement on quantum as part of the approval process. An application for the Commissioner’s approval of proposed payments should include the following information: ▪ the nature of the business in which the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner is employed ▪ precise and full details of the duties to be performed ▪ number of hours worked by the employed spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner during the average week and the number of weeks worked during the year ▪ particulars of other labour employed and wages paid other than to the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner ▪ the method of payment to the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, such as whether in cash or by credit to a bank account, and ▪ wages to be paid to the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner. Examples of situations in which favourable treatment of an application could be expected are: ▪ the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner who assists with client entertainment ▪ a farmer’s spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner who prepares meals for workers or contractors engaged in tasks about the farm.  Question we’ve been asked In March 2019, Inland Revenue released Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 19/01, “What are the requirements for claiming tax deductions for payments to family members for services?”, which deals with the requirements for claiming income tax deductions for payments to spouses and partners, as well as other family members (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 149). The item emphasises that to claim a deduction it must be shown that the family member provides services to the business, even if prior approval for a deduction has been obtained from the Commissioner. Relevant types of evidence include a wage book, employment contract, vehicle logbook, bank statements, etc. The amount paid must not be excessive for the services the family member provides. If the amount paid is excessive, the Commissioner may reallocate the income of the business based on what is considered reasonable and, in the case of a company, treat the excess as a dividend derived by the family member. The Commissioner considers payments to family members for services to be excessive when the amount paid is more than a reasonable amount for the services provided. This is explained in QB 14/09, “Income tax — meaning of ‘excessive remuneration’ and ‘excessive profits or losses’ paid or allocated to relatives, partners, shareholders or directors” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 9, October 2014 at 22) — discussed in detail in ¶16-070, ¶19-210 and ¶23-142. If the family member is the person’s spouse or partner, the Commissioner’s prior approval is required for a deduction, unless the business is run through a company. QB 19/01 states: “10. Approval may be granted only if: ▪ the Commissioner considers the payment is for services rendered; ▪ the services are not domestic services or otherwise services connected with the home, although, if you are a farmer, the Commissioner may approve a deduction for amounts you pay your spouse or partner to cook for farm employees;  ▪ the services are provided in earning income from your business; ▪ a deduction for the payment has not been claimed. … 12. You may apply for approval to deduct payments you have already made during an income year. You have up until the time you file your tax return to get approval. However, it may be a good idea to apply before you start paying your spouse or partner. The Commissioner cannot backdate approval after a deduction has been claimed in your tax return. Even if the amount paid is not excessive, a deduction claimed without prior approval is denied and your spouse or partner will still need to treat the payment as income. 13. You must make a new application for approval if you increase the amount you pay your spouse or partner. Otherwise, you do not have to make a new application for approval every year.” The item confirms that to apply for approval the details set out above must be provided to the Commissioner. A number of examples are included in the item. Law: IT07 s DB 57, DC 5  ¶10-905 Deductibility of interest payable under stapled stock No deduction is allowed to a company for interest payable under, expenditure (or loss) incurred in connection with, or expenditure (or loss) incurred in borrowing money secured by or owing under a stapled debt security to which s FA 2B applies. Debt securities stapled to a share are treated as equity for tax purposes. This recharacterisation of debt instruments, which would previously have given rise to a deduction, is aimed at preventing loss to the revenue base through the practice of companies using stapled  stock instruments with debt components to pay shareholder substituted dividends while claiming tax deductible interest. The main features of the rules are: ▪ Debt securities stapled to ordinary shares will be treated as shares rather than debt for most tax purposes. ▪ The debt security component of the stapled stock instrument continues to be treated as debt under the thin capitalisation rules (see ¶26-620) unless it is stapled in proportion to the available subscribed capital of all participating shares. ▪ Excluded from the rules are: □ debt securities stapled before 25 February 2008 □ debts stapled to fixed-rate shares, and □ debts of a non-widely held company stapled under a shareholder’s agreement. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009 at 100 for a detailed analysis. Law: IT07 ss DB 10B, FA 2B  ¶10-910 Deductibility of subscriptions A deduction may be allowed under the general permission for membership dues paid by a business or a self-employed person. This would be on the basis that membership of the particular professional or trade association can be said to assist with the generation of assessable income. That may be the case, for example, where the association disseminates information amongst members that assists with the updating of technical knowledge. An employer who pays professional membership dues on behalf of employees could expect to be allowed a deduction for the payments made. The outgoings would be deductible along with other forms of  employee remuneration. That the dues may be owed personally by the employee/member would not operate to prevent deductibility for the employer’s payment.  ¶10-915 Deductibility of taxes No deduction is allowed for the payment of: ▪ income tax ▪ ancillary tax, including further income tax, imputation penalty tax and qualifying company election tax (but excluding those listed specifically below) ▪ a civil penalty paid under the Tax Administration Act 1994 ▪ an amount withheld under s 1471 or 1472 of the US Internal Revenue Code (relating to the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) (see further at ¶26-280)), or ▪ a foreign tax, penalty or interest on unpaid tax that is substantially the same as those items under New Zealand law. Excluded from the prohibition on deductibility are payments of fringe benefit tax and employer’s superannuation contribution tax (see ¶10292 for the timing of these deductions) as well as PAYE, RWT and NRWT. The prohibition on the deduction of income tax probably reflects the general law. Income tax could not be regarded as an expense of earning assessable income. It represents a charge on assessable income, once the income has been earned. Law: IT07 ss DB 1  ¶10-920 Deductibility of tax return expenses A deduction is allowed for expenditure incurred by a taxpayer in connection with:  ▪ calculating or determining the year’s income tax liability ▪ calculating or determining GST payable ▪ preparing, instituting or presenting an objection, challenge or appeal to an income tax or GST determination or assessment ▪ making a contribution to another person’s challenge or appeal costs to an income tax or GST determination or assessment. There are some specific exclusions. No deduction is allowed for costs incurred in connection with: ▪ a matter arising from an income tax or GST return that was fraudulent or wilfully misleading ▪ an offence under any of the Inland Revenue Acts ▪ a shortfall penalty ▪ an objection, challenge or appeal that is inconsequential or frivolous, or ▪ a GST matter to the extent to which it relates to a taxable activity that does not constitute a business for income tax purposes. The provisions authorising the deduction can be expected to allow a deduction for accounting fees payable for the preparation of GST and income tax returns. Legal fees for advice on issues associated with the inclusion or exclusion of an item in a return, and for the conduct of tax litigation, can also be expected to be allowed as a deduction. To be allowed as a deduction, there must be a connection between the expenses and preparation of the tax return. That test was not able to be satisfied by a taxpayer who travelled 200km to discuss his affairs with a consultant. See Case E84 (1982) 5 NZTC 59,441. Similarly in relation to a taxpayer who claimed to deduct the cost of travelling out of town to discuss with relatives an objection to an  income tax assessment. The travelling expenses were too remote and not sufficiently relevant to the lodgement of the objection. See Yurjevich v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,185. The deduction for tax return expenses may be regarded as overruling the general law. Under the general law, no deduction was allowed for the costs incurred in pursuing before the courts the deductions claimed by a business for various expenses. The preparation of accounts for tax purposes was not regarded as money spent by the trader to earn profits. The costs were incurred for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax to be paid out of the year’s profits. See Smith’s Potato Estates Ltd v Bolland (I of T) (1948) 30 TC 267. The effect of the specific deduction provisions can be seen to be to authorise a deduction not otherwise available for expenses incurred in determining a tax liability. Specific provisions are necessary because the expenses relate to distributing profits rather than the earning of profits. Outside of the context of determining the year’s tax liability, it may be that the general permission authorises a deduction for costs incurred in complying with taxation obligations. For example, the general permission may allow a deduction for the cost of obtaining assistance to ensure compliance with withholding tax obligations as part of the necessity to conduct business activities in a lawful manner. There is no complexion to the exercise of quantifying a division of the year’s profits between the business and the Crown. The two deduction provisions may be seen to have a complementary operation in the sense that one may allow a deduction for costs that the other does not permit. Law: IT07 s DB 3  ¶10-930 Deductibility of telephone rental expenses Inland Revenue’s (IR) policy on deductions for rental of telephone equipment and lines when a business is based at the taxpayer’s  home is set out in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 12, May 1994 at 2. IR will allow deductions for up to 50% of the cost of telephone rental for businesses based at home if the home has only one telephone line. This will apply regardless of whether the rental charged is at the domestic or commercial rate. IR will allow a deduction of more than 50% if the taxpayer can show that the actual use of the telephone supports a higher percentage of business use. If the home has two telephone lines, one charged at the domestic rate and the other at the commercial rate, 100% of the commercial rental is an allowable deduction. In this case, no part of the domestic rental is deductible. The policy does not apply to toll calls or to reimbursement of employee telephone rental by employers. The policy is applicable for both income tax and GST purposes. Before the 2017–18 income year, IR’s policy applied to all taxpayers who ran a business from home except for farmers whose principal or full-time occupation is farming. Farmers continued to be allowed 100% of their telephone rental as a deduction. However, in March 2017, IR released interpretation statement, IS 17/02, “Income tax — deductibility of farmhouse expenses” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 82). The statement withdraws and replaces a number of concessions for farmers with effect from the beginning of a farmer’s 2017–18 income year (see ¶27-015). With regard to the deductibility of telephone expenses, the statement now applies the above policy to farmers. Thus, all farmers who operate their business from home will apply the policy and claim up to 50% of the cost of telephone rental, unless they can show that the actual business use of the telephone is greater than 50%. Where there are two lines with one charged at the commercial rate and one at the domestic rate, 100% of the commercial rate line will be deductible, and no part of the domestic rental will be deductible.  ¶10-935 Deductibility of losses from theft A deduction is allowed under s DB 42 for a business which suffers a loss from a misappropriation of property. This applies if the loss is  not deductible under some other provision. The misappropriation of trading stock, for example, may effectively be a deduction in the valuation of the stock, so that it would not be necessary to rely on s DB 42. No deduction is allowed if the misappropriation is by a person associated with the person who carries on the business. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which the loss is ascertained. Alternatively, it may be allowed in earlier years if the Commissioner considers that that would be fair. The deduction also extends to a misappropriation of property by a person who provides services to the business. Law: IT07 s DB 42  ¶10-940 Deductibility of travel expenses Travelling expenses incurred in the course of earning assessable income can be expected to be allowed as a deduction. This is provided the capital limitation or the private limitation does not have application. The latter may apply to travelling expenses incurred on travel between home and the place of work. See ¶10-710. Example 1: A taxpayer was allowed a deduction for the costs of an aircraft used in his rural practice. The deduction was allowed irrespective of the taxpayer’s means of travel. See Garrett v FC of T 82 ATC 4060.  Example 2: Travel to other cities to attend auditions and appear in productions was deductible by an actress because the expenses were necessarily incurred in carrying on her business for the purpose of gaining assessable income. See Case G77 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,353.  Example 3:  An investor who owned five properties which were located in districts away from his place of residence was allowed a deduction for costs associated with his annual visit to inspect and supervise the properties. It was accepted that it was reasonably necessary for the taxpayer from time to time to visit the properties so as to manage his income-earning activities. See FC of T v Green (1950) 81 CLR 313.  The Commissioner may request that a claim for travel expenses be supported by records. Travel and capital expenses Generally, travel expenses incurred in connection with the purchase of plant or other items of fixed capital are regarded as expenditure of a capital nature and therefore not deductible. The expenses are looked upon as part of the cost of the machinery, and thus should be capitalised and depreciated at the appropriate rate. However, a deduction is allowed for travel expenses incurred on trips undertaken to make a general survey of new machines or new processes. A deduction is also allowed if the object of the travel is to buy trading stock. See Case F72 (1984) 6 NZTC 59,924. Overseas travel expenses The Commissioner’s current policy on the deductibility of overseas travel expenses is now set out in part in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 2, August 1995 at 13 and in “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 13/05: “Income tax — deductibility of a companion’s travel expenses” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 1, February 2014 at 40). QB 13/05 replaces the 1995 Tax Information Bulletin item insofar as it deals with claims for a companion’s or a family member’s overseas travel expenses. The QWBA does confirm that the Commissioner’s policy with regard to the information that a taxpayer should supply when asked by Inland Revenue (IR) to support a claim for overseas travel expenses and the apportionment of private expenses is still correct and relevant. Overseas travel expenses are deductible to the extent that they are incurred in the course of the taxpayer’s business. Any element of holiday expenditure is not deductible. IR generally requires full details of the expenditure where the taxpayer is the sole or principal  shareholder in business on his or her own account or a partner in a partnership, is accompanied by his or her spouse and/or family or has not recently or ever travelled to the countries visited and the business is such that the need for the trip is not apparent. The information obtained should include the itinerary, firms visited, business conducted, diversions from the business itinerary for private purposes, items of expenditure and the total cost. Where the taxpayer does not control the business and is not a relative of the person in control or the taxpayer travels for a well-established business or travels for a business that buys or sells stock overseas or otherwise obviously needs to send staff overseas, the request for information can be confined to details such as total cost of trip, name of traveller, reason for trip and costs applicable to the private elements of the trip. Where the travel is by group tour it is common for the tour organisers to supply IR with the necessary details. In such cases IR usually gives overall approval in principle and the individual’s travel claims are generally accepted without further questions. However, the Commissioner is entitled to review individual claims for such expenses at a later date. Where the business content is considered to be less than 50%, general approval is not given unless there are special circumstances. The percentage is calculated by considering how each day of the tour is spent. The total number of days spent on business-related activities is compared to the total number of days of the tour excluding days spent travelling. Example 4: Gertrude owns a transport business. In December last year she went to Europe to visit her parents on their 50th wedding anniversary and to negotiate contracts for her business. She was overseas for 42 days, and spent 11 days on business. Gertrude would have gone to visit her parents regardless of whether she went over for business. However, Gertrude needed to go overseas at some stage during the year for business. Before she left, Gertrude contacted her business contacts overseas and arranged to meet them. Gertrude travelled overseas for two different purposes. In her income tax return, Gertrude claimed a deduction of 11/42 of the cost of the airfare, and the cost of accommodation and meals she spent for the 11 days while on business.  The Commissioner would accept the deduction because in the circumstances it is an acceptable method of apportioning the expenditure. It is clear that Gertrude travelled overseas for two reasons. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 2, August 1995 at 14.  Apportionment Where the trip contains a private or capital element, an apportionment of the costs may be necessary. Each case will depend on its own particular facts: ▪ no deduction — work-related aspect incidental to holiday ▪ apportionment — two advantages, truly separate, and ▪ 100% deduction — holiday aspect incidental to work element. Example 5: Fred owns a tin can store. He was running short of stock so he went to Australia to buy some rubbish cans. While he was overseas, Fred took the opportunity to spend a couple of days with his old friend Bert. Fred spent a total of three days in Australia, two days on holiday and one day on business. In Fred’s tax return he claimed as a deduction the total cost of the airfare, and the cost of the accommodation and meals for the day he spent on business. In Fred’s situation the Commissioner would allow the entire deduction. The holiday aspect of the trip is incidental to the main purpose of travelling overseas for business. Fred only visited Bert because he was there for business and took the opportunity to see him. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 2, August 1995 at 14.  Taxpayer’s spouse and/or family members accompanying taxpayer QB 13/05 replaces the Commissioner’s earlier policy on professional people deducting their wife’s travel expenses (June 1973) and that part of the 1995 Tax Information Bulletin item, referred to above, relating to the deductibility of a companion’s travel expenses. QB 13/05 provides that, in most cases, a companion’s travel expenses will not be deductible. If the companion is accompanying the  taxpayer simply for companionship or to attend social functions, then this expenditure will not have a sufficient nexus with the assessable income of the taxpayer’s business. However, a deduction may be permitted where the companion supports the taxpayer, to a reasonably substantial degree, in the business being undertaken. The companion does not need to be an expert in the affairs of the business, but they do need some knowledge of the business being undertaken or they must possess some special skill or expertise to be able to provide support in a material way. If these qualities are present, then the Commissioner considers a sufficient nexus will exist between the companion’s travel expenses and the assessable income of the taxpayer’s business. The Commissioner no longer considers that a companion’s travel expenses would be deductible where the companion is travelling with the taxpayer because of illhealth. In such cases there is likely to be an insufficient nexus with the taxpayer’s business or income-earning activity and the expenses would likely be of a private or domestic nature. The companion might arguably be providing the taxpayer with support to a reasonably substantial degree, but that support relates to the taxpayer’s personal circumstances and not to the business being undertaken. Example 6: A spouse’s travelling expenses were deductible because her support had enabled the taxpayer’s employee to carry out the taxpayer’s business. There had been a sufficient nexus between the expenditure on the spouse’s travel and the business of the employer. See Case K75 (1988) 10 NZTC 602.  Investor’s travel expenses In some instances an investor may be able to claim a deduction for the travel expenses incurred in connection with the management or administration of investments. The investor would need to show that there is a sufficient connection between the travel expenses and the derivation of assessable income. Example 7:  A taxpayer was originally a national of another country, “Redland”, but in 1966 he emigrated with his family to New Zealand. The exchange control laws of Redland prohibited the export of capital and so the taxpayer was forced to leave behind his capital of almost $500,000 in various investments. Management of the investments was left in the hands of an accountant but, by 1974, it had become evident to the taxpayer that the accountant was managing matters to his own personal advantage by making loans on very favourable terms to his relatives. Accordingly, in 1974 the taxpayer went back to Redland and spent six weeks restructuring his affairs to enable him to assume full control of management of the investments. Further visits were made in 1975 and 1976 in pursuit of that object. The authority held that the taxpayer was able to claim a deduction for the travelling expenses incurred on each of the three trips back to Redland. After noting that there was a steady increase in the taxpayer’s income from his investments in the years 1973–1977, the authority found that although there was some consequential restructuring of capital assets, the taxpayer’s main purpose in making the first trip was to increase the income to which he was entitled and which could be sent out to him in New Zealand. The other trips undertaken were in furtherance of that objective. See Case D55 (1980) 4 NZTC 60,830.  Example 8: A taxpayer claimed a deduction for vehicle expenses and depreciation incurred in the course of visiting farms and a beach property owned by companies in which the taxpayer had an interest. The deduction was disallowed on the ground that the expenditure was of a private or domestic nature. The Taxation Review Authority affirmed the Commissioner’s assessments and held that the dominant purpose of the visits was not to earn assessable income. The taxpayer was merely protecting his capital investment; therefore, the necessary relationship between the visits and the gaining or producing of assessable income had not been established. See Case G7 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,018.  See also Example 3 above.  TAX CREDITS Introduction to tax credits  ¶11-010  Current tax credits  ¶11-015  Child taxpayer credit  ¶11-035  Tax credit for gifts and donations  ¶11-055  Procedure for claiming refund of charitable gifts credit ¶11-060 Payroll giving  ¶11-063  Independent earner tax credit  ¶11-080  Multi-rate PIE credits  ¶11-092  KiwiSaver tax credits  ¶11-094  ¶11-010 Introduction to tax credits Credits Once a person has determined their income tax liability by applying the basic tax rate to their taxable income, that liability is satisfied by any available tax credits and then, finally, through the payment of terminal tax. In some cases, a person’s tax credits may exceed their income tax liability for the tax year. In that case the composition of the surplus tax credits is determined as if those credits were set off against the tax liability in the following order: ▪ non-refundable credits (eg foreign tax credits — see ¶26-250) ▪ credits for supplementary dividends (see ¶26-500) ▪ tax credits for imputation credits (see ¶17-010) ▪ carried forward R&D tax credits (see ¶10-855)  ▪ R&D tax credits (see ¶10-855), and ▪ refundable credits (eg excess tax payments, Working for Families tax credits, Māori authority credits — see ¶1-400). Any unused non-refundable credits are lost. Unused credits for supplementary dividends may be made available to another company in the same wholly-owned group or applied against the tax payable for any one or more of the previous four years for the company or another company in the same wholly-owned group: s LP 3. Any surplus imputation credits are either converted by the taxpayer to a loss and carried forward or, if the taxpayer is a natural person, carried forward as a tax credit. Any surplus R&D tax credits are either refunded, to a specified maximum, or carried forward, while any surplus refundable credits are refunded to the taxpayer by the Commissioner. See further at ¶2-110. Law: IT07 ss BC 8, LA 1–LA 5, LP 3  ¶11-015 Current tax credits A number of provisions under the Income Tax Act 2007 provide for tax credits. They relate to the following: ▪ ss EH 30–EH 33: main income equalisation scheme (see ¶27075) ▪ s EH 77: thinning operations income equalisation scheme (see ¶27-085) ▪ s HC 24(2): entitlement of trustees (see ¶25-035) ▪ s LB 1: PAYE income payments (see ¶1-400) ▪ s LB 2: provisional tax payments (see ¶22-240) ▪ s LB 3: resident withholding tax (see ¶15-190)  ▪ s LB 4: abating Working for Families tax credits, minimum family tax credit and Best Start tax credit under subparts MD, ME and MG (see ¶12-170) ▪ s LB 4B: R&D tax losses (see ¶10-853) ▪ s LB 5: non-resident withholding tax (see ¶26-440) ▪ s LB 6: retirement scheme contribution tax (see ¶29-320) ▪ s LB 6B: residential land withholding tax (see ¶7-020) ▪ ss LB 7 and LB 8: personal service rehabilitation payments (see ¶5-303) ▪ s LC 13: independent earner (see ¶11-080) ▪ subpart LD: charitable or other public benefit gifts (see ¶11-055) and payroll donations (see ¶11-063) ▪ subpart LE: imputation credits (see ¶17-010) ▪ subpart LJ: foreign income tax (see ¶26-250) ▪ subpart LK: attributed controlled foreign company income (see ¶26-085) ▪ subpart LO: Māori authority credits (see ¶24-314) ▪ subpart LP: supplementary dividends (see ¶26-500) ▪ subpart LS: multi-rate PIEs and investors (see ¶11-092, ¶29-140 and ¶29-145) ▪ subpart LT: petroleum mining (see ¶28-125) ▪ subpart LU: mineral miners (see ¶28-105) ▪ subpart LY: research and development tax credit (see ¶10-855)  ▪ s LZ 6: home vendor mortgage (if approved before 5 August 1982) ▪ subpart MK: KiwiSaver schemes and complying superannuation funds (see ¶11-094 and ¶29-250). Law: IT07 Pts L, M  ¶11-035 Child taxpayer credit With effect from the 2012–13 tax year, the child taxpayer credit was repealed and replaced with a limited tax exemption so children do not need to file a tax return if they have income less than $2,340 not taxed at source (for example, income from mowing their neighbour’s lawn or babysitting). This exemption does not apply to income that is a PAYE income payment, resident or non-resident passive income, excluded income or income exempt under another provision. It therefore does not allow a child to claim a refund of tax that has already been paid, such as PAYE and resident withholding tax (RWT). ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes to add beneficiary income to the above list of types of income excluded from the tax exemption. The amendment is intended to apply retrospectively from the 2012–13 income year, the original application date of the exemption provision. However, a savings provision will apply for taxpayers who took a tax position relying on the current law in a return filed before the date the Bill was introduced. A child for these purposes is someone who is: ▪ 14 or under ▪ 15, 16 or 17 and still attending school (excluding tertiary institutions), or  ▪ 18, and turned 18 on or after 1 January in the previous tax year and continues at school. Children and interest income Banks and other financial institutions are required to deduct RWT at a rate of 45% from interest paid to clients who have not furnished their Inland Revenue (IRD) numbers. Many children do not have IRD numbers; therefore, their income will be subject to the 45% tax rate, unless they apply for a tax number. Applying for an IRD number does not necessarily mean that the child will have to furnish an annual tax return disclosing interest and other income earned. Law: IT07 s CW 55BB  ¶11-055 Tax credit for gifts and donations A refundable tax credit is available for cash gifts of $5 and over made by natural persons to specified charitable or public organisations. No credit is available for absentees, companies, public authorities, Māori authorities, unincorporated bodies and trustees liable for tax under subpart HC and s HZ 2, although companies and Māori authorities may claim deductions for charitable donations. See further at ¶10-492, ¶10-700 and ¶24-340. Persons who participate in the payroll giving scheme (see ¶11-063) cannot claim this credit in relation to their payroll donations. A credit cannot be claimed for testamentary gifts. The amount of the credit is calculated as 33⅓% of the total gifts made in a tax year. The total amount of qualifying donations made in a tax year must not exceed the person’s taxable income for that year. The total amount refunded must be no more than the annual amount of the tax credits. No credit can be claimed if a taxpayer’s taxable income is reduced to nil by utilising available net losses. Example 1: In the 2017–18 tax year Roger has a loss brought forward of $150,000 and current year income of $100,000. Therefore, his taxable income for 2017–18 is nil. Roger has  made charitable donations of $10,000. Roger’s tax credit will be nil because the tax credit cannot exceed his taxable income.  Charitable or other public benefit gifts A “charitable or other public benefit gift” is defined as a gift of money of $5 or more made to one of the organisations listed in sch 32 or specified below (see s LD 3(2)): ▪ a society, institution, association, organisation, or trust that is not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of an individual, and whose funds are applied wholly or mainly to charitable, benevolent, philanthropic or cultural purposes within New Zealand ▪ an entity that is removed from the charities register, but only for the period from when it fails to meet the registration requirements to the later of the day the entity is removed from the register or the day all appeal rights are exhausted in relation to the entity’s charitable status ▪ a community housing entity that meets the requirements to derive exempt income under s CW 42B ▪ a public institution maintained exclusively for any one or more of the above purposes ▪ a board that is constituted under subpart 5 of Pt 3 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, a board of trustees constituted under Pt 9 of the Education Act 1989) that is not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual ▪ a tertiary education institution that is established or continued under subpart 3 or 4 of Pt 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, established under Pt 14 or 15A, or subpart 1 of Pt 10 of sch 1 of the Education Act 1989) and has  not been disestablished under that Act and that is not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual ▪ a fund established and maintained exclusively for the purpose of providing money for any one or more of the above purposes in New Zealand by a society, institution, association, organisation or trust that is not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of an individual, or ▪ a public fund established and maintained exclusively for the purpose of providing money for any one or more of the above purposes in New Zealand. Note that with effect from 1 April 2020, for a gift of money to be a charitable gift to one of the above entities, the entity must be on the list published by the Commissioner (see below). This does not apply to community housing entities, Boards of Trustees or tertiary education institutions. In addition, if an entity qualifies for registration under the Charities Act 2005, it has to register to qualify for donee status. A subscription of $5 or more paid to an entity that does not confer any rights arising from membership is also included in a “charitable or other public benefit gift”. A testamentary gift and a gift made by forgiving some or all of a debt are excluded from being a “charitable or other public benefit gift”. The list of funds and institutions that qualify for the credit (both those listed in sch 32 and those Inland Revenue (IR) has approved as satisfying the criteria in s LD 3(2)) is regularly updated on the IR website (www.ird.govt.nz — search keyword: donee organisation). Debt forgiveness Note that the meaning of a “charitable or other public gift” previously referred to a “monetary gift of $5 or more”. In Roberts v C of IR (2018) 28 NZTC ¶23-070, the High Court held that the annual forgiveness of debts to a charitable trust were monetary gifts paid to that charitable trust and as such qualified as charitable gifts. The court held that the forgiveness of debt to the trust met the definition  of “gift”. The gifts were for an amount of more than $5 each year. A “monetary gift of $5 or more” did not require a cash payment. This decision was inconsistent with the policy intent and, as a result, the definition was retrospectively amended to ensure that only gifts of money, including payments made by way of electronic bank transfers, credit cards and cheques, qualified as gifts. Gifts in kind or debt forgiveness were not intended to be included. A savings provision existed for taxpayers who had already taken a position in reliance on the previous wording, providing they filed a return or donation tax credit claim before 16 January 2019. However, in a decision handed down on 17 December 2019, the Court of Appeal dismissed the Commissioner’s appeal from the High Court decision and held that forgiveness of debt can qualify as a “charitable or other public benefit gift” under s LD 1. The court held that both the words “monetary” and “money” in s LD 3(1) meant more than just cash. If parliament was concerned about excluding forgiveness of debt, it should address those concerns by more detailed and specific drafting of the provisions. See C of IR v Roberts (2019) 29 NZTC ¶24-026. In response to the Court of Appeal decision, the Government acted swiftly to further amend the legislation to clarify that a “charitable or other public benefit gift” does not include a gift made by debt forgiveness (as stated above). The amending legislation applies retrospectively from 1 April 2008 with a savings provision for taxpayers who had already taken a position based on the previous legislation and had filed a return or donation tax credit claim before 17 December 2019. Wholly or mainly applying funds In September 2018, the Commissioner released an interpretation statement IS 18/05, “Income tax: donee organisations — meaning of wholly or mainly applying funds to specified purposes within New Zealand”, and fact sheet, “Applying the ‘safe harbour’ approach” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 10, November 2018 at 25). The statement applies from the beginning of the 2019–20 income year.  The Commissioner had previously accepted in some cases that “wholly or mainly” could mean as little as a bare majority, ie more than 50%. In the statement, the Commissioner concludes that “wholly or mainly” in this context requires considerably more than a bare majority, but that it is not possible to interpret the expression with any greater certainty. However, to bring greater certainty, the Commissioner proposed an administrative safe harbour. If an organisation meets or exceeds the minimum safe harbour percentage, the Commissioner will generally accept that the organisation meets the “wholly or mainly” requirement without further enquiry. The Commissioner has set the safe harbour percentage at a minimum of 75%. Other interpretative conclusions reached in the statement include: ▪ The most appropriate meaning of “funds” is “cash on hand”, which includes cash and other highly liquid assets available to meet commitments. “Funds” is accepted as equating to the accounting concepts of “cash” and “cash equivalents”. ▪ “Applied” means “devoted to” or “put to use”. Funds can be applied by being spent or accumulated, ie set aside for future spending or invested. ▪ The expression “funds are applied” suggests: □ The application of funds arises as a result of the organisation either spending money or undertaking some affirmative act to invest or set aside the money for future spending for some purpose or purposes. □ The affirmative act is the decision to accumulate funds that has been made at the appropriate level in the organisation for decisions of that type according to its established management practices. □ The decision to accumulate funds will need sufficient detail to be able to characterise that application of funds as  advancing charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, or cultural purposes within New Zealand. ▪ It is the specified purposes that must be “within New Zealand” not the application of funds. This means the location where funds are spent is not relevant. ▪ The enquiry in regard to the application of funds is to identify objectively whether a sufficient relationship exists between the purposes served by the actual or proposed activity and advancing specified purposes within New Zealand. The connection needs to be sufficiently direct, although not necessarily an immediate connection. ▪ Where funds have been applied to more than one purpose, apportionment may be necessary. Apportionment issues can be approached on a similar basis to apportionment arising under s DA 1 (the general permission). The statement also includes a large number of examples to help an organisation decide how much of its total funds are accumulated or spent for specified purposes within New Zealand. Safe harbour approach The safe harbour approach comprises determining an organisation’s safe harbour percentage for a financial year. Calculating an organisation’s safe harbour percentage involves three steps: ▪ Use the organisation’s statement of cash flows in its financial statements or statement of receipts and payments in its performance report to find the organisation’s “total funds”. “Total funds” is the sum of the cash on hand at the end of a year and the cash spent during the year (ie, all cash outflows whether capital or revenue). ▪ Find the amount of the organisation's “funds applied to specified purposes within New Zealand”. This is a combination of the cash spent, invested or set aside entirely for specified purposes  within New Zealand and amounts reasonably apportioned to those purposes. ▪ Divide the cash spent or set aside for specified purposes within New Zealand (as per the second step) by the organisation’s “total funds” (as per the first step) and express this as a percentage. If the figure is below 75% in any year, the cumulative total of its funds applied over the current and preceding two years can be used (including years before the commencement of the statement). This allows some year-on-year variation for exceptional years. However, it is not expected that under the rolling three-year cumulative safe harbour calculation an organisation would devote 50% or less of its funds to specified purposes within New Zealand in any particular year. The statement states that if the rolling three-year cumulative safe harbour percentage is below 75% or the figure in any year is 50% or below, the organisation should contact Inland Revenue as soon as possible. The statement includes a worked example of the safe harbour calculation. Change in practice Therefore, there was a change in IR’s practice with effect from the 2019–20 income year. Organisations unable to satisfy the “wholly or mainly” requirement under the new higher threshold have alternatives if they wish donors to continue to be eligible for tax benefits. These include: ▪ seek to be added to sch 32 of the Income Tax Act as an overseas donee organisation approved by Parliament (this option is not available if an organisation is established for the principal purpose of fostering or administering any religion, cult or political creed)  ▪ establish and maintain a separate fund exclusively for specified purposes within New Zealand (in which case only gifts to that fund would be eligible for donation tax benefits). Donations to a fund established and maintained for specified purposes In June 2019, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 19/10, “Donations: What is required to establish and maintain a fund under s LD 3(2)(c) of the Income Tax Act 2007?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 7, August 2019 at 23), which considers what is required to establish and maintain a fund so that it qualifies as a donee organisation. This item complements IS 18/05. Under s LD 3(2)(c), donations to a fund established and maintained exclusively for the purposes of providing money for any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic or cultural purposes within New Zealand by a non-profit entity will be eligible for a tax credit. In the Commissioner’s view, a fund requires or involves the following: ▪ The fund must be established and maintained by a non-profit entity. ▪ The fund must comprise an actual stock of money or other assets set aside for the purposes of providing money for one or more of the specified purposes within New Zealand. ▪ A non-profit entity can set up a fund by making book entries in its financial accounts but it must make sure the entries are supported by an actual stock of money or other assets and show that the fund has been set up on a “firm or permanent basis” for the required purpose. ▪ Best practice suggests a fund is established and maintained through a combination of book entries and a document setting out the establishment, operation and winding up of the fund (either as part of the rules of the non-profit entity or as a standalone document).  ▪ Maintaining the fund requires maintaining the actual stock of money or other assets consistent with any book entries, as the fund’s actual stock of money or other assets at its establishment may change over time through additions or reductions. Best practice suggests movements of the money or other assets in the fund are tracked and specifically reported on in the nonprofit entity’s financial accounts. ▪ The fund’s money must be used for, or used to provide money for, the required purpose. Whether money is used for the required purpose is determined by where the specified purposes are advanced (ie within New Zealand) and not where the fund’s money is spent. The fund’s money may be used: □ for purposes other than the required purpose, but only if they are subordinate or incidental to the required purpose and are not independent purposes □ by the non-profit entity to meet or reimburse reasonable costs incurred specifically in administering the fund. This includes a contribution to meet a reasonable share of the non-profit entity’s administration costs where such costs include the costs of administering the fund, or □ by the non-profit entity to meet or reimburse costs it incurs furthering the entity’s own purposes, provided these are exclusively specified purposes within New Zealand and are consistent with the purposes of the fund. ▪ The fund must be maintained for the required purpose throughout its lifetime, including the disposal of the fund’s money or other assets if wound up. ▸Note: In December 2019, Inland Revenue released a draft operational statement in two parts: ▪ ED0207a, “Charities and donee organisations: Part 1: Charities” (see ¶24-195), and  ▪ ED0207b, “Charities and donee organisations: Part 2: Donee organisations”, which sets out how Inland Revenue and Charities Services (formerly the Charities Commission) will monitor and advise charitable entities of the requirements for income tax exemption and donee status. ED0207b provides guidance to entities wanting to become donee organisations or that are already donee organisations, including: ▪ the types of entities that can become donee organisations ▪ the benefits of being a donee organisation ▪ how to get approval as a donee organisation ▪ the requirements for a “charitable or public benefit gift”, and ▪ the donation tax receipt requirements. The draft statement also addresses other administrative tax matters relevant to donee organisations, such as record-keeping and the implications of a donee organisation with charitable purposes being deregistered from the Charities Register. Donations to religious and educational organisations Donations to approved New Zealand religious organisations, medical research schools and universities, approved overseas aid funds, kindergarten associations, state schools, school boards of trustees and parent-teacher associations are listed by IR as qualifying for the tax credit. To qualify, the school must be state-funded (including integrated schools) or be approved as a charity for tax purposes. School fees Payment of state-funded school fees are also listed as being eligible so long as the fees go to the school’s general fund. However, tuition fees or payments for specific activities such as school trips are not eligible because the fees in such cases do not have the character of  an unconditional gift. See the notes on the personal tax credit claim fact form, IR 526. In June 2018, the Commissioner released two Questions We’ve Been Asked, QB 18/10, “Income tax — state schools and donation tax credits” and QB 18/11, “Income tax — state integrated schools and donation tax credits” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 119 and 127). The items consider what payments by parents to state integrated and non-integrated schools are gifts for donation tax credits purposes. They conclude that the following payments by parents to both state integrated and non-integrated schools are gifts where the payment is voluntary and is: ▪ to assist generally with funding the delivery of the school’s curriculum ▪ for a specific purpose or project to benefit the school as a whole where no material benefit or advantage is obtained in return for making the payment, or ▪ to assist with the school’s cost of delivering individual subjects or activities forming part of the school’s curriculum and in which the student may participate regardless of whether any payment is made. In addition, a payment by parents to a state integrated school will be a gift where the payment is voluntary and is a payment to a qualifying proprietor to assist the proprietor with its cost of supporting the delivery of the school’s curriculum with special character. Example 2: NCEA level 2 biology contribution Jack is in Year 12 at his local college and has chosen to study National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) level 2 biology. The college has requested the following voluntary payments from Jack’s parents given his biology subject selection: ▪ $20 to assist the school with the cost of a biology field trip to the local mud flats (attendance is a compulsory part of course requirements for the internal achievement standard), and ▪ $30 for a biology work book (optional but recommended).  Jack’s parents agree to purchase the workbook and make the requested voluntary contribution to assist the college with the cost of the field trip. The school administrator issues a donation tax receipt to Jack’s parents for $20. The school provides Jack with a biology workbook. The voluntary payment towards the school’s field trip is a gift, but the $30 payment for the purchase of the optional workbook is not a gift. The reason the contribution to assist the school with the cost of the biology field trip is a gift is because a sufficient link does not exist between the payment and the benefit obtained by Jack. Under the Education and Training Act 2020, Jack is entitled to free education. The field trip is part of the delivery of the school’s curriculum. Jack can attend even if his parents choose not to make any or part of the requested payment. The field trip will go ahead regardless of whether Jack or any of his classmate’s parents make the payment. Payments by the parents are not made in return for the biology field trip. If the biology workbook was required (rather than optional) it becomes part of the delivery of the college’s curriculum. In that case Jack’s parents could not be compelled to purchase the workbook, but the college could ask for a voluntary contribution towards the college’s cost of providing it. Jack would be entitled to use the workbook regardless of whether his parents make any voluntary contribution. Any contribution towards the cost of the workbook is a donation, so the school could issue a donation tax receipt.  Subscriptions A subscription paid to any of the above organisations or funds can qualify as a gift, as long as the subscription does not confer any rights arising from membership of that organisation or fund. The procedure for claiming the charitable gifts tax credit is set out at ¶11-060. QWBA — donee organisations and gifts In June 2016, IR released Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/05, “Income tax — donee organisations and gifts”, which clarifies when a donations receipt may be issued by a donee organisation (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 7, August 2016, at 33). The item considers what is meant by a “donee organisation” and a “charitable or other public benefit gift” and sets out the key principles on the meaning of “gift” (based on overseas case law). The Commissioner considers a “gift” in s LD 3(1) to be a payment of $5 or more that is: ▪ made voluntarily  ▪ by way of benefaction, and ▪ for which the supporter receives no benefit of a material character in return. The Commissioner considers a payment will not be a “gift” where: ▪ the supporter (or someone else) receives a benefit of a material character in return for making the payment, or ▪ the donee organisation is placed under a material obligation to do or provide something in return for the supporter’s payment being made. Anti-avoidance provision With effect from 1 April 2019, an anti-avoidance provision applies to arrangements involving tax credits under s LD 1. Section GB 55 provides that the Commissioner can reduce the amount of a tax credit under s LD 1 when a person has entered into an arrangement that has a purpose or effect of defeating the intent and application of that section. Law: IT07 ss LD 1–LD 3, sch 32; TAA s 41A  ¶11-060 Procedure for claiming refund of charitable gifts credit Section 41A prescribes the ways a charitable gifts tax credit may be claimed. In practice, a person may: ▪ complete the relevant donation section when providing other income information through the pre-populated account as part of the income tax year-end process (see ¶2-016) ▪ submit the receipts electronically during the tax year, or ▪ use the claim form IR 526.  Details of the total gifts made for the year (see ¶11-055), with receipts, must be provided in each case. If an individual has already submitted receipts during the year, these will automatically be taken into account without the need to fill in a separate claim form. The time period for taxpayers requesting refunds of charitable gifts credits is four years from the end of the tax year in which the donation was made. A taxpayer can apply for a refund for the tax year in which the gift is made in the four-year period beginning with: ▪ the 1 April following the end of the taxpayer’s income year corresponding to the tax year, if the taxpayer has a standard or early balance date, or ▪ the day after the end of the taxpayer’s income year corresponding to the tax year, if the taxpayer has a late balance date. However, applications may be made before these dates in special circumstances. These “special circumstances” include the situation of a taxpayer who leaves New Zealand either permanently or for a significant length of time, or a trustee of a deceased person’s estate who wishes to wind up the estate. With effect from 1 April 2019, for the purposes of the four-year time bar for amending assessments, the payment of a refund is treated as an assessment and the four-year time bar period for the Commissioner to amend the tax credit claim starts at the end of the tax year in which the taxpayer applies for the refund. Receipts To claim the charitable gifts credit, the taxpayer must produce receipts and satisfy the Commissioner that the gift has been made. Inland Revenue (IR) requires that the receipt show the amount and date of the donation, the name of the donor(s), a clear statement that it is a donation, the signature of an authorised person, the official stamp of the donee organisation, and the word “copy” or “replacement” if applicable (see IR 526).  Note that in response to the Christchurch earthquake, IR has modified its receipt requirements. For donations going to donee organisations supporting the Christchurch earthquake relief effort, particularly through third parties, the minimum receipt requirements are the amount and date of the donation, a statement showing Christchurch Earthquake donation (or something similar), and the receipt must be on the letterhead of the organisation issuing it. The maximum donation that may be claimed through modified receipts is $1,200 per receipt. For donations over $1,200, the standard criteria for receipts (as above) apply. IR has released Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/05, “Income tax — donee organisations and gifts”, which is intended to clarify when a donations receipt may be issued by a donee organisation (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 7, August 2016 at 33). The item does this by establishing what constitutes a charitable or other public benefit gift for donation tax credit purposes. See discussion at ¶11055. Tax credit claim forms filed by a tax agent or representative do not need to have the receipts attached. Section LD 1(4) clarifies that a claim for a credit refund may be made on behalf of a taxpayer by a tax agent or representative, provided the tax agent or representative sights the receipt and the taxpayer retains the receipt for the next four tax years. Claim forms filed by tax agents or representatives must be clearly marked to show that they are filed by a tax agent or representative. Generally, claim forms sent to a tax agent or representative will have an “A” printed on them. Credit claim notice Once the claim has been processed, IR sends the taxpayer a credit claim notice setting out the amount of the credits allowed and the resulting refund. Any overpayments of refunds are recoverable as an excess credit. Refunds are available for transfer under Pt 10B (transfers of excess tax) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. See ¶2148. Law: IT07 s LD 1; TAA ss 41A, 108(1C)  ¶11-063 Payroll giving Employees are able to give gifts of money to a donee organisation of their choice by way of a direct deduction from their pay (salary and wages) through their employer’s payroll. The scheme provides a tax credit for gifts of money from the employee’s pay. The employee receives an immediate reduction in their tax by way of a tax credit for each pay period. This tax credit is separate from the end-of-year donation tax credit claim system. Payroll donations cannot be claimed under that system. See ¶11-055. A tax credit for payroll donations is treated as a non-refundable credit. In summary, payroll giving is: ▪ voluntary for employers and employees ▪ available only to employees whose employers file their employment income information electronically and who choose to offer payroll giving in their workplace ▪ given a set tax credit of 33⅓% of the amount donated. The tax credit is offset against the PAYE amount calculated on the employee’s gross pay, thus reducing the amount of PAYE payable for that period. A maximum allowable tax credit is limited to the tax portion of the PAYE deduction on the employee’s pay for each pay period ▪ to be made to a donee organisation for an employee to be entitled to the tax credit. A donee organisation is a society, institution, association, organisation, trust or fund as described in s LD 3(2) or listed in sch 32 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Example 1: Calculation of payroll donation Louise, an employee, asks her employer to deduct $10.00 from her gross weekly wage of $762.00. The amount of the tax credit is $3.33 and it is used to reduce the amount of PAYE that is payable by the employee for the pay period. The employer  must transfer the $10.00 donation to her chosen donee organisation on or before the PAYE payment due date that is closest to the expiry of two months after the end of the pay period that the donation was deducted. (See Example 2 below for how to determine this transfer date.) The employee has a take-home pay for the week of $627.88. The charity receives $10.00. IR receives a PAYE payment of $124.12. Employee’s gross wage for the week  $762.00  Donation amount  $10.00  PAYE on gross wage (includes ACC levy)  $127.45  Tax credit for payroll donation ($10 × 33⅓)  $3.33  PAYE less tax credit for payroll donation  $124.12  Employee’s gross wage  $762.00  Less PAYE net of the tax credit for payroll donation  $124.12  Less donation  $10.00  Employee’s take-home pay for the week  $627.88  Employee’s responsibility It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that the recipient of the donation is in fact a donee organisation and to supply sufficient details to enable the transfer to be made. Employers are not expected to obtain all the details, eg bank details, to facilitate payroll giving. If the recipient is not a donee organisation then the tax credit is extinguished and any shortfall in PAYE is the employee’s liability. Employer’s responsibility When an employer agrees to establish payroll giving in their workplace, it is the responsibility of the employer to ensure that the payroll donations are transferred to the correct donee within a specified period of time. Employers must transfer any payroll  donations to donee organisations on or by the due date required by ss RA 15 and RD 4 that is nearest to the expiry of two months after the end of the pay period in which the donation was deducted. Example 2: Last day of pay period  Add two months  Transfer date  Monthly filer  12 February 20X3  12 April 20X3  20 April 20X3  Twice monthly filer  12 February 20X3  12 April 20X3  5 April 20X3  Employers are also required to keep adequate records that prove the transfers were made. Until such time as transfer takes place, the moneys are held in trust for the employee by the employer. Payroll donation tax credit provisions are part of the PAYE rules. Therefore, the normal penalty and use of money interest charges that apply to PAYE determination and deduction apply to payroll giving. In addition, employers are liable to a shortfall penalty of 150% if the employer knowingly does not transfer the payroll donations to the correct recipient. Law: IT07 ss LD 4–LD 8, RD 2(1)(b); TAA ss 124ZG, 141E(1)(c)  ¶11-080 Independent earner tax credit The independent earner tax credit (IETC) is a tax credit for individuals who are New Zealand tax residents, whose annual income is between $24,000 and $48,000. To receive the IETC the following criteria must apply: ▪ The person (or their spouse or civil union or de facto partner) is not entitled to Working for Families tax credits (or an overseas equivalent). ▪ The person does not receive an income-tested benefit, New Zealand superannuation, veteran’s pension (or an overseas  equivalent). The entitlement to this tax credit is determined monthly. If a person does not meet the criteria at any point in a month then they do not qualify for that entire month. The effect of the IETC is that an eligible person receives a tax credit of $520 ($10 per week). The tax credit is subject to an abatement, ie an eligible person who earns over $44,000 per annum will receive a tax credit that decreases by 13¢ for every additional dollar earned. Persons entitled to the IETC may receive the tax credit either through their pay or as a lump sum at the end of the tax year. Salary and wage earners will receive the IETC through their pay and selfemployed persons or contractors can claim the tax credit at the end of the tax year. Those who receive the IETC through their pay will have to change their tax code with their main employer (if they have more than one job). The new tax code must be recorded as “ME” or “ME SL”, if the person has a student loan. This requires the completion of a new tax code declaration form (IR 330) by the employee. Employees must request a personal tax summary so that Inland Revenue can calculate the amount of the IETC the person is entitled to for the tax year. If a person qualifies for the IETC for part of a tax year, that person will only be eligible for the period in which they met the criteria. Where a person becomes a New Zealand tax resident part-way through the year and then meets the criteria for eligibility, that person will qualify for the tax credit for the full months they are resident. Where a person receives some form of government assistance for part of the year, they will not be entitled to the IETC for the months they received such assistance. Example: Lydia received the unemployment benefit from 1 April 2018 until 10 July 2018. She then found a job working as a seamstress for Sheryl’s fashion business. Her total  income for the tax year (including her unemployment benefit) was $30,000. Lydia will be eligible for the IETC from August 2018 till 31 March 2018.  If a person receives a student allowance, ACC payments, paid parental leave or the accommodation supplement, they will still be eligible for the IETC if they meet all other eligibility criteria. Law: IT07 s LC 13  ¶11-092 Multi-rate PIE credits A multi-rate PIE may be able to claim an income tax credit for an investor (who is not a zero-rated portfolio investor) where credits are allocated to the investor in accordance with s HM 51 or HM 53 or for a loss calculated under s HM 55. For further details see ¶29-140 and ¶29-145. A multi-rate PIE cannot claim a tax credit for notified foreign investors in foreign investment PIEs in relation to imputation credits attached to dividends derived by the PIE. In certain circumstances, where the income of an investor is not excluded income, the investor can claim a tax credit for tax paid by a multi-rate PIE on that income. Similarly, if tax is paid by a multi-rate PIE in respect of the income allocated to a zero-rated investor or after the end of an exit period, the affected investor can claim a tax credit. Law: IT07 ss LS 1–LS 4  ¶11-094 KiwiSaver tax credits People who contribute to a KiwiSaver scheme (or a complying superannuation fund) are eligible for a member tax credit that matches half the amount of their contribution to the scheme for a year up to $521.43. For further details see ¶29-250. Law: IT07 subpart MK  CHILD SUPPORT AND FAMILY SCHEME Child Support  ¶12-010  Family Scheme  ¶12-110  CHILD SUPPORT ¶12-010 Overview of the child support scheme The child support scheme operates under the Child Support Act 1991. The aim of the legislation is to ensure that: ▪ parents take financial responsibility for their children ▪ carers (the person caring for the child) receive financial support from liable parents, the level of which conforms with legislatively fixed standards ▪ the costs to the Government of providing benefits to carers are offset by a fair contribution from liable parents, and ▪ a system exists for the collection and payment of child support. The Child Support Act is one of the Inland Revenue Acts. It is administered by Inland Revenue (IR). IR accepts applications for child support from carers, calculates how much support a liable parent is required to pay and collects the amount due. If the carer is a beneficiary, any child support payments collected by IR are first applied to paying the carer’s benefit. Any surplus, after the Government’s costs of the benefit are met, is then paid directly to  the carer. If the carer is not a beneficiary, any child support payments collected by IR are paid directly by IR to the carer without deduction. IR also collects and pays domestic maintenance (ie maintenance paid to a spouse or partner where there are no children), courtordered child maintenance and any maintenance payable under a voluntary agreement (ie an agreement to pay child support where both parties agree on the amount to be paid). Participation in the child support scheme is compulsory for those people who: ▪ receive a social security benefit (eg sole parent support, an unsupported child’s benefit, and certain supported living payments, jobseeker support, young parent payments, or emergency benefits) ▪ are required to make financial contributions under the Child Support Act, or ▪ are required to make maintenance payments under a court order. Carers who do not receive a benefit can choose whether they want to have child support collected by IR under the child support scheme. Voluntary agreements Often a liable parent and carer will choose to enter into a voluntary agreement for child support, rather than adopt the level of support prescribed in the Child Support Act. Voluntary agreements do not need to be registered in the Family Court. Voluntary agreements are registered with IR by completing form IR 102. IR will administer voluntary agreements where an application is made by both parties and it is for regular payments of at least $520 pa to be paid by the liable parent to the receiving carer. The receiving carer, children and liable parent must be New Zealand citizens or residents. The details of the agreement can be completed on form IR 102, or a written agreement can be attached to the form.  Once IR accepts an application to administer a voluntary agreement, only IR can collect the payments. Changes to a voluntary agreement can be made at any time by completing a new form IR 102. Voluntary agreements do not need to be administered by IR unless the receiving carer or the liable parent is required to comply with the Child Support Act. A voluntary agreement ends if: ▪ the agreement expires ▪ either party applies for a formula assessment ▪ the agreement no longer meets the conditions ▪ the receiving carer asks IR to stop collecting child support (form IR 107), or ▪ the child the agreement covers no longer qualifies for child support. Terminology Child  A child qualifies for child support if he or she is a New Zealand citizen (or ordinarily resident in New Zealand) who is under 18 years of age, or aged 18 and enrolled at and attending a school, is not married (or living in a de facto relationship) and is not financially independent.  Carer  A person (whether or not a parent) who provides ongoing daily care to the child, other than on a commercial basis.  Receiving carer A carer who receives payments of child support. A parent of a qualifying child is a receiving carer of that child if the parent’s income percentage is less than their care cost percentage for the child. If a parent’s income percentage and care cost percentage are both 100%, they are a receiving  carer. A non-parent carer of a qualifying child is also a receiving carer if the carer provides at least 35% of ongoing daily care to the child. Liable parent  A parent who is liable to pay child support. A parent of a qualifying child is a liable parent of that child if the parent’s income percentage is greater than or equal to their care cost percentage for that child. Liability also arises if IR accepts a voluntary agreement for payment of child support or if a court order is made requiring a parent to pay child support.  Care cost percentage  The percentage of costs associated with providing a proportion of ongoing daily care to a child.  Income percentage  The relevant parent’s percentage of the combined child support income amounts of all the qualifying child’s parents.  Education and information IR provides booklet IR 100, “Helping you to understand child support”, April 2020, to assist paying persons and carers at the beginning of their child support obligations. Alternatively, further information on child support can be found on IR’s website at www.ird.govt.nz/childsupport. Law: CHS ss 1–19, 58  ¶12-012 Proposed amendments to child support scheme The Child Support Amendment Bill was introduced into Parliament on 11 March 2020. The Bill proposes amendments to the Child Support Act 1991. The proposals are aimed at supporting Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation and cover four main aspects of the child support scheme. Broadly, the policy proposals in the Bill are:  ▪ simplifying the penalty rules by— □ moving the imposition of the second phase of the initial penalty to 28 days after the initial due date □ repealing the rule that provides the minimum penalty imposed is $5, and □ introducing a grace period of 60 days from the first due date during which a newly liable person, or a person returning to the child support scheme, will not be charged late payment penalties ▪ introducing payment of child support by compulsory employer deduction from salary, wages or schedular payments made to newly liable parents ▪ introducing a time bar of four years that will— □ prevent reassessments for periods outside the four-year period □ start four years after the end of the relevant child support year, and □ be subject to specific exceptions to address concerns about fairness (such as whether the information provided by a person is fraudulent or willfully misleading), and ▪ inserting a definition of “income” that will— □ widen the definition of income used for child support purposes to include investment income, such as dividends and interest, and □ move the definition of income used for child support purposes from a taxable income to a net income base. The Bill also contains a number of technical amendments to assist with the administration of the scheme, including when working with  customers who have unusual circumstances. These include: ▪ providing that, when a person joins the child support scheme, an estimation can be backdated to the start of the assessment if received within 28 days of notification of the assessment ▪ updating the end-of-year reconciliation rules for estimates to reflect the income over the period an estimate applies for ▪ permitting Inland Revenue to offset the amount owed between two parents ▪ amending the prisoner exemption to allow it to be granted to a liable person who is the overseas equivalent of a New Zealand prisoner in legal custody under the Corrections Act 2004 ▪ amending the hospital exemption to allow it to be granted to a liable person in an overseas hospital or residential care facility ▪ introducing an exemption for persons suffering from long-term periods of illness ▪ repealing the mixed-age expenditure table ▪ providing Inland Revenue with a discretion to adjust child expenditure calculations in situations where complex care arrangements for children in the same calculation are not adequately accounted for by the usual method ▪ clarifying the legislation to state explicitly that a child support assessment should end when a child leaves State care ▪ introducing time constraints of 60 days for the provision of court orders of parentage for the backdating of child support assessments ▪ providing a person has 28 days from the date on which they are first notified of an assessment to advise Inland Revenue of  existing living circumstances, otherwise the circumstances are effective from the date of application for child support ▪ providing that a child should not be considered financially independent for child support purposes unless they are aged at least 16 ▪ providing that child support should cease at the end of the calendar year in which a child turns 18, if that child attends school up until the end of the school year, and ▪ amending the definition of residency, for child support purposes, to enable a person’s intentions to be taken into account. The proposed changes are intended to take effect from 1 April 2021. ▸ Note: Supplementary Order Paper (SOP) No 538 to the Child Support Amendment Bill was introduced into Parliament on 9 July 2020. The proposed changes in the SOP repeal child support incremental penalties and simplify the penalty write-off provisions. Child support incremental penalties Late payment penalties are imposed on a liable parent if he/she does not pay on time. Initial penalties are applied in two stages in the first month, and if the amount is not paid, incremental penalties are imposed each month the amount is outstanding. It is proposed that incremental penalties will no longer be charged on child support amounts not paid on time. The proposed amendment will apply from 1 April 2021. The change will apply to unpaid amounts on or after 1 April 2021. That is, penalties will not be applied to: ▪ new debt arising on or after 1 April 2021, and ▪ existing unpaid amounts due before 1 April 2021. Penalties imposed before 1 April 2021 will remain.  Simplification of child support penalties write-off rules It is proposed that the child support penalty write-off rules be simplified to allow for the write-off of penalties when: ▪ there was a reasonable cause for the late payment ▪ the late payment was due to the failure of another person to make a deduction ▪ the late payment was due to an honest mistake by the liable parent ▪ an error was made by Inland Revenue ▪ a person is in serious hardship ▪ it is an inefficient use of Inland Revenue’s resources to collect the penalty, and ▪ the receiving carer has uplifted the debt, or waived the right to the payment, to which the penalty relates and a write-off would be fair and reasonable. The proposed amendment will apply from 1 April 2021. To ensure parents who are charged penalties on or before 31 March 2021 are not worse off under the new rules, a “fair and reasonable” penalty write-off provision would be retained that would only be used to write-off penalties charged on or before 31 March 2021.  Calculation and payment ¶12-015 Calculation of child support Under the Child Support Act 1991, any parent or carer of a qualifying child can apply to Inland Revenue (IR) for a child support assessment to be made. If the carer is not a beneficiary, they can choose whether to apply for child support. Social security  beneficiaries must apply for child support. Applications by a parent for child support formula assessments should be made using form IR 101. Non-parent carers who care for a child for at least 35% of the time can apply for a formula assessment using form IR 954. Nonparent carers must apply for child support from both parents. The formula for calculating child support was changed with effect from 1 April 2015 to better reflect shared care, the income of both parents and the estimated costs involved in raising children in New Zealand. The formula uses both parents’ taxable income, but first deducts a living allowance, any dependent child allowance for children in a parent’s care and any multi-group allowance where a parent is paying or receiving child support for children in other relationships. It also takes into account the care each parent provides for the children and the costs of raising them. (For a discussion of the calculation of child support before 1 April 2015, see CCH, 2015 New Zealand Master Tax Guide.) IR calculates how much child support should be paid each year, divides this into monthly amounts and advises the liable parent how much they need to pay and the receiving carer how much they’re entitled to receive. If two parents are liable to pay the other an amount of child support, the Commissioner may offset one liability against the other. The formula for periods commencing 1 April 2015 and later is: (i% − c%) × p where: i% is the parent’s income percentage, being the parent’s share of the combined child support income amount of all the parents of the child (see below) c% is the parent’s care cost percentage (see below), and p is the child expenditure amount for a qualifying child (see below). Each of the elements of the formula is considered below.  Child support income amount A parent’s income percentage is determined by dividing the person’s child support income amount by the sum of the child support income amounts of all the parents of that child. A parent’s child support income amount must first be determined, therefore, before a parent’s income percentage can be determined. A parent’s child support income amount is the person’s adjusted taxable income for the relevant year minus each of the following: ▪ the person’s living allowance ▪ the sum of any dependent child allowances to which the person is entitled, and ▪ any multi-group allowance relating to the child. Adjusted taxable income If a person’s income from the previous year was only from salary, wages, a benefit or New Zealand interest and dividends, their taxable income will be their taxable income from the calendar year (1 January to 31 December) immediately preceding the start of the child support year. For example, a person’s child support assessment for the 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 year would be based on their taxable income earned in the year from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017. If a person’s income from the previous calendar year was from overseas or included sources other than salary, wages, benefit, interest or dividends (such as rents or self-employment income), the assessment will be based on their taxable income in the tax year immediately preceding the most recent tax year (ie income from two tax years ago), adjusted by an inflation factor. For example, for the 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 child support year, the person’s assessment would be based on their income tax return filed for the 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 year, adjusted by an inflation factor. The inflation factor was 1.6% for 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 and increased to 1.9% for 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020.  The first of the three amounts deducted from a person’s adjusted taxable income to determine a person’s child support income amount is the living allowance. This being an amount equivalent to that specified in cl 1 of sch 4, pt 2 of the Social Security Act 2018 (previously cl 1 of sch 3A of the Social Security Act 1964) as the rate of sole parent support, grossed up and annualised. A different amount applies for persons receiving supported living payments who are single beneficiaries with one or more dependent children. The rate for those persons is specified in cl 1(c) of sch 4, pt 3 of the Social Security Act 2018 (previously cl 1(c) of sch 6 of the Social Security Act 1964). For a child support year (1 April to 31 March), the relevant amount in the relevant schedule of the Social Security Act is the amount specified in the schedule in force on 1 January in the immediately preceding child support year. For the 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 child support year, the following are the relevant amounts: Living allowance  $19,867  Living allowance if receiving supported living payments  $22,713  Dependent child allowance A dependent child allowance is an amount deducted from a parent’s adjusted taxable income to recognise the costs of children in their care that they are the parent of and for whom child support is not paid or received. A dependent child, in relation to any person, is: ▪ the person’s child ▪ under 18 years of age (or aged 18 and attending school) ▪ not financially independent ▪ not living with another person in a marriage or de facto relationship  ▪ not a child of any person assessed for child support in New Zealand or overseas, and ▪ maintained as a member of the person’s family and for whom the person provides at least 28% (103 nights a year) of the ongoing daily care. The allowance is based on the same method for calculating child support for a qualifying child. It is the parent’s care cost percentage for the dependent child multiplied by the appropriate amount taken from the child expenditure table for that child based on the adjusted taxable income, less living allowance, of that parent alone. The amount of the allowance is determined by the formula: c% × e ÷ n where: c% is the care cost percentage of the parent in relation to the dependent child (if the child was a qualifying child) e is the amount determined by child expenditure table for the dependent child on the basis of: — the child support income amount of the parent alone, with that amount being treated as the adjusted taxable income of the parent, minus the parent’s living allowance — the total number of the parent’s dependent children, and — the age group of those children n is the total number of the parent’s dependent children. Multi-group allowance A multi-group allowance is deducted from a person’s adjusted taxable income for those parents who have multiple child support liabilities with different parents. The multi-group cost for each child is calculated according to their age and how much it would cost if all the children were living with the person. The calculation is based on  the person’s adjusted taxable income less their living allowance and any dependent child allowance. This amount of child support income is then used to determine the cost of raising each child by using the child expenditure table and the relevant age bracket. Multi-child cap The amount of child support liability of a parent can be capped where a parent has qualifying children in more than one child support group. This is referred to as the multi-group cap. The purpose of the multi-group cap is to avoid liable parents paying more in child support than they would pay if all the children for whom they are liable to pay child support were living together. The multi-group cap for a child is the amount determined as: (100% − c%) × m where: c% is the parent’s care cost percentage in relation to the child m is the multi-group cost of the child. Income percentage As stated above, a parent’s income percentage is determined by dividing the person’s child support income amount by the sum of the child support income amounts of all the parents of that child. Having followed the steps above to determine a parent’s child support income amount (their adjusted taxable income less the living allowance and any dependent child and multi-group allowances), the parent’s income percentage can now be determined. The person’s income percentage is calculated by dividing their child support income amount by the combined child support income amounts of all parents of that child. Example 1: Anna and Steve are both currently working full-time. Anna earns $62,131 a year before tax, and Steve earns $47,985 a year before tax. Neither is entitled to a dependent child or multi-group allowance. Their income percentages are calculated as follows:  Calculation  Anna  Steve  Taxable income  $62,131  $47,985  Less living allowance $19,867  $19,867  Child support income $42,264  $28,118  Anna and Steve’s combined child support income is $70,382. Their percentage share of the combined child support income is: Income percentage 60.05%  39.95%  Care percentage — ongoing daily care The Commissioner must establish the proportion of ongoing daily care for a qualifying child. Shared care for child support purposes is currently set at a minimum of 28% of nights during the year. This equates to two nights per week on average. For this purpose a year is assumed to be 365 days. The Commissioner must rely on the content of any care order or agreement relating to a qualifying child when establishing the proportion of ongoing care. This may be challenged by a parent or carer if they have evidence that the care order or agreement should not be relied upon. If there is no care order or agreement, the Commissioner must establish the proportion of care primarily on the basis of the number of nights that the child spends with a carer. If the number of nights is not a true reflection of the proportion of care actually provided by a carer, the Commissioner can use the amount of time that the carer is the person responsible for the daily care of the child. To be a receiving carer, a person must have at least 35% of ongoing daily care. This means that there can be no more than two receiving carers for a qualifying child at the same time. Care cost percentage The care cost percentage signifies the share of costs incurred by the parent in supporting the care of the child. The care percentage, discussed above, is converted into a care cost percentage using the table from sch 2 of the Child Support Act, set out below. The table has a tiered series of thresholds. A proportion of care less than 28%  gives rise to a cost care percentage of 0%. On the other hand, where the proportion of care is 73% or more, the cost care percentage will be 100%. Proportion of ongoing Care cost percentage daily care 0% to 27%  0%  28% to 34%  24%  35% to 47%  25% plus 2% for each percentage point over 35%  48% to 52%  50%  53% to 65%  51% plus 2% for each percentage point over 53%  66% to 72%  76%  73% to 100%  100%  Example 2: Jane’s proportion of ongoing daily care (her care percentage) is 32%. Her care cost percentage is 24%. John’s proportion of ongoing daily care is 39%. His care cost percentage is 33%.  Income percentage less care cost percentage Once a parent’s income percentage and care cost percentage have been determined, the first part of the formula (i% − c%) can be calculated. Subtracting the care cost percentage from the income percentage for each parent gives the child support percentage. This result determines whether the parent is eligible to receive or liable to pay child support as follows: ▪ If the result is a negative percentage, that parent is a receiving carer. If the amount of ongoing daily care is 35% of more, the person is eligible to receive child support.  ▪ If the result is a positive percentage, that person is a liable parent. If the amount of ongoing daily care is 65% or less, the person will be required to pay child support. ▪ If the result is a nil percentage, the person is a liable parent. If the amount of ongoing daily care is under 28%, the person will be required to pay child support. ▪ Note that a parent whose income percentage and care cost percentage are both 100% is a receiving carer. For liable parents required to pay child support, the amount of child support payable will be the positive child support percentage multiplied by the child expenditure amount. Child expenditure amount The amount of child support payable by a parent is based on the estimated average cost of raising a child in New Zealand. The cost associated with raising a child differs depending on the child’s age, the total number of children and the combined income of both parents. The child expenditure amount reflects the cost of raising children. It is set as a percentage of income and differs based on the level of income. As incomes rise the percentages decline to reflect that the proportion of income spent on children declines as income rises. The child expenditure table is published on the Inland Revenue website. The amounts will be updated on an annual basis. The amounts for the 2021 child support year are as follows:  Age group: All children aged 12 and under Income range  1 child  2 children  3 or more children  $0.00 to $31,816  17 cents for each dollar  24 cents for each dollar  27 cents for each dollar  $31,817 to  $5,409 plus 15  $7,636 plus 23 $8,590 plus 26  $63,633  cents for each dollar over $31,816  cents for each dollar over $31,816  cents for each dollar over $31,816  $63,634 to $95,449  $10,182 plus 12 cents for each dollar over $63,633  $14,954 plus 20 cents for each dollar over $63,633  $16,862 plus 25 cents for each dollar over $63,633  $95,450 to $127,266  $14,000 plus 10 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $21,357 plus 18 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $24,816 plus 24 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $127,267 to $159,082  $17,182 plus 7 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $27,044 plus 10 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $32,452 plus 18 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $159,083 and over  $19,409  $30,226  $38,179  Age group: All children, or the oldest 3, are aged 13 and over Income range  1 child  2 children  3 or more children  $0.00 to $31,816  23 cents for each dollar  29 cents for each dollar  32 cents for each dollar  $31,817 to $63,633  $7,318 plus 22 cents for each dollar over $31,816  $9,227 plus 28 cents for each dollar over $31,816  $10,181 plus 31 cents for each dollar over $31,816  $63,634 to $95,449  $14,318 plus 12 cents for  $18,136 plus 25 cents for  $20,044 plus 30 cents for  each dollar over $63,633  each dollar over $63,633  each dollar over $63,633  $95,450 to $127,266  $18,136 plus 10 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $26,090 plus 20 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $29,589 plus 29 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $127,267 to $159,082  $21,318 plus 9 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $32,453 plus 13 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $38,816 plus 20 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $159,083 and over  $24,181  $36,589  $45,179  Age group: At least 1 child aged 0 to 12 and 1 or 2 children aged 13 or over Income range  2 children  3 or more children  $0.00 to $31,816  26.5 cents for each dollar  29.5 cents for each dollar  $31,817 to $63,633  $8,431 plus 25.5 cents for each dollar over $31,816  $9,386 plus 28.5 cents for each dollar over $31,816  $63,634 to $95,449  $16,544 plus 22.5 cents for each dollar over $63,633  $18,454 plus 27.5 cents for each dollar over $63,633  $95,450 to $127,266 $23,703 plus 19 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $27,203 plus 26.5 cents for each dollar over $95,449  $127,267 to $159,082  $35,635 plus 19 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $29,748 plus 11.5 cents for each dollar over $127,266  $159,083 and over  $33,407  $41,680  Examples of application of the formula assessment The following examples show how child support is calculated in two different situations (examples adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 5, June 2013 at 8, and based on 1 April 2019–31 March 2020 figures): Example 3 (insufficient shared care): Paul and Ally have recently split up. They have two children, Dylan aged 10 and Nathan aged 6. Ally is the main carer for Dylan and Nathan and she is not in paid employment. She receives a benefit from Work and Income for herself and the children. When Work and Income granted Ally a benefit she was required to apply for a child support assessment. Paul spends time looking after his children but this is not enough to be recognised for child support purposes. Ally receives a benefit of $19,867 a year before tax. Paul is currently in full time employment and earns $72,610 a year before tax. Calculation  Ally  Paul  Taxable income  $19,867  $72,610  Less living allowance  -$19,867  -$19,867  Child support income  $0  $52,743  Ally and Paul’s combined child support income is $52,743 and this will be used to calculate child support liability. Income percentage  0%  100%  Care cost percentage  100%  0%  Income percentage less care cost percentage  -100%  100%  Because Paul’s income percentage less care cost percentage is positive, he is assessed as the liable parent, and is required to pay 100% of the annual cost of raising Dylan and Nathan. The annual cost of raising Dylan and Nathan based on Ally and Paul’s combined child support income and using the expenditure on children table is $12,437.64. Paul’s liability is $12,437.64 × 100% = $12,437.64. Paul is assessed to pay an annual amount of $12,437.64 or $1,036.47 per month, for the care of Dylan and Nathan. Because Ally receives a sole parent benefit, this payment will be used to help cover the cost of this benefit.  ▸ Note: The child expenditure amount is calculated as: $7,362 + ([$52,743 − $30,675] × 0.23) = $12,437.64.  Example 4 (sufficient shared care): Liam and Kirsty are separated. Together they have two children, Joshua aged 13 and Olivia aged 10. They have always agreed to share the responsibility of caring for their children. Joshua and Olivia both spend alternate weeks (Monday to Friday) at each parent’s house, but they spend every weekend and the school holidays with Liam. Liam has care of the children for 65% of the time and Kirsty has them for the remaining 35%. Because both Kirsty and Liam look after their children for more than 28% of the time, these percentages will be used when working out the child support assessment. Calculation  Liam  Kirsty  Taxable income  $53,660  $50,800  -$19,867  -$19,867  $33,793  $30,933  Less living allowance Child support income  Liam and Kirsty’s combined child support income is $64,726. Income percentage  52.21%  47.79%  Care cost percentage  75%  25%  Income percentage less care cost percentage  -22.79%  22.79%  Because Kirsty’s income percentage less care cost percentage is positive, she is assessed as the liable parent, and is required to pay 22.79% of the annual cost of raising Joshua and Olivia. The annual cost of raising Joshua and Olivia based on Liam and Kirsty’s combined child support income and using the expenditure on children table is $16,710.60. Kirsty’s liability $16,710.60 × 22.79% is $3,808.35. Kirsty is assessed to pay an annual amount of $3,808.35 or $317.36 per month, for the care of Joshua and Olivia. ▸ Note: To work out the care cost percentages, see the table above under the heading “Care cost percentage”. The child expenditure amount is calculated as: $15,951 + ([$64,726 − $61,350] × 0.225) = $16,710.60.  Minimum child support liability There is a minimum amount of child support to pay, even if the liable parent has little or no income. The minimum amount is revised each  year. It is calculated as the minimum liability for the immediately previous tax year adjusted by the movement in the Consumers Price Index for the year ending with the December quarter before the tax year to which the increase will apply. The minimum child support liability for the assessment period to 31 March 2019 was $919 pa (or $17.67 a week) and it increased to $936 pa (or $18 a week) for the period to 31 March 2020. There is an online calculator available on IR’s website at www.ird.govt.nz/childsupport. Election to estimate income Any person can elect to provide an estimate of taxable income if they expect their current year taxable income will be 85% or less of their original adjusted taxable income. An estimate can be made for the whole child support year or at any time during the year. This is called an “election period”. This option to estimate income is not available to child support liabilities determined by court orders or under voluntary agreements. Example 5: Bob earned $40,000 employment income in the previous year but will earn only $20,000 this year. Bob can apply to IR to have his child support assessed on $20,000, because it is at least 15% less than the taxable income that would otherwise be used for his child support assessment.  A person can estimate their income if: ▪ their year-to-date income, if any, plus estimated taxable income has reduced by 15% or more from their original adjusted taxable income, and ▪ they make an estimate during the child support year, and their “annualised estimated taxable income” is less than their original adjusted taxable income.  “Annualised estimated taxable income” means the taxable income expected to be earned during the election period converted to an equivalent annual figure (the income they would have received if the election period had been for 12 months). Thus, the formula for calculating the annualised estimated taxable income where the estimate does not cover a full child support year is: a ÷ b × 365 where: a is the person’s estimated taxable income for the election period b is the number of days in the election period. Example 6: Joanne changes jobs in November and her income reduces. She was assessed using her original taxable income of $55,000 and decides to estimate. She needs to earn $46,750 or less for the year to be able to estimate. Joanne’s year-to-date income for 1 April to 30 October is $25,000 and she expects to earn a further $15,000 from 1 November to 31 March. As the total of $40,000 ($25,000 + $15,000) is less than $46,750 she may be able to estimate. Joanne’s annualised estimated taxable income for 1 November to 31 March (151 days, the election period) must also be less than the original taxable income used in her assessment before she can estimate. Applying the annualisation formula, Joanne’s annualised estimated taxable income is $36,258.28 ($15,000 ÷ 151 × 365). This is less than her original taxable income of $55,000 so she can estimate. IR will use Joanne’s annualised estimated taxable income of $36,258.28 in her assessment from 1 November to 31 March.  The Commissioner cannot accept an estimate if: ▪ the person has estimated their income for a previous child support year, and □ the person was required to file a tax return for that year and has not, and □ the due date for filing the return has passed  ▪ the person’s adjusted taxable income or child support income has been set by a departure order or an administrative review ▪ a receiving order has been made in relation to the person’s child support debt ▪ the person has estimated within the last three months and the new estimate changes their annualised estimated taxable income by $500 or less. An application for an estimate can be made to IR using form IR 104, by telephone or through the person’s myIR secure online services account. The Commissioner may require the application be accompanied by information and evidence that, in the Commissioner’s opinion, is sufficient to support the person’s estimate of income. Examples of suitable evidence would be new pay slips showing the reduced income or a letter from the person’s employer or accountant advising the reduced income details. End-of-year reconciliation After the end of the child support year, the person’s actual earnings are compared with their estimate and a square-up assessment is made. If the person has overpaid child support, they will generally receive a credit towards the following year’s child support. A refund of the credit may be available in some circumstances. If the person has underpaid child support, they will have 30 days to pay the difference. Where a person has received too much child support, it may be collected back from them. If they have not received sufficient child support, they will receive the amount owing once it has been collected by IR from the liable parent. Further information on estimation For further information on estimating income for child support purposes, see IR leaflet IR 151, “Estimating your income” (September 2017), and IR booklet IR 100, “Helping you to understand child support” (April 2020), at 22–26. Amendments to assessments  Section 87 of the Child Support Act gives the Commissioner a wide discretion to amend any assessment at any time where it is considered the changes are necessary to give effect to the Act. The amendments can apply to assessments for the current child support year, a future year or to past years. The Commissioner has released a standard practice statement, SPS 16/02, “Child support and domestic maintenance — amendments to assessments”, which sets out how the Commissioner will exercise the discretion under s 87 to amend assessments. This includes assessments the Commissioner makes as a result of a voluntary agreement entered into by parties. The SPS does not apply to requests to depart from the formula assessment of child support. That is covered by the administrative review procedure (see ¶12020). Previously, IR’s practice had been to amend all incorrect assessments over a number of years. The SPS states that the Commissioner no longer considers this to be the best approach for dealing with s 87 amendments, because it uses considerable IR resources and also has the potential to create uncertainty for parents or carers. Instead, the practice now is for the Commissioner to consider the circumstances of individual cases before making changes to past years. The SPS states that the Commissioner is to consider all amendment requests made by parents or carers and errors identified by IR staff. Before an assessment is amended, the amendment must be considered necessary to give effect to the Child Support Act. When considering whether an assessment should be amended, the Commissioner will consider the principles set out in the SPS. Not all assessments will necessarily be amended. The SPS applies from 30 May 2016 and is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 94. Law: CHS ss 14–17, 28–36D, 40, 44, 44A, 72, 87, 152B  ¶12-020 Departure from the child support formula assessment  In certain circumstances, the Commissioner may make a determination allowing a departure from the formula assessment for calculating child support (see ¶12-015). The determination process can be commenced at the request of any liable parent or receiving carer of a qualifying child, or by the Commissioner. The procedure is known as an “administrative review” and involves a hearing with an independent review officer. The procedures are similar to the process for a Family Court departure order. Applications for child support review by liable parents or receiving carers Liable parents or receiving carers of qualifying children may make applications for an administrative review of child support where they consider special circumstances exist to depart from the standard formula calculation. All applications for administrative review must be in writing, stating the grounds on which the application is made. All other parties to the child support assessment are advised of the application and have the right to reply, confirm or contest any details given by the applicant and the right to attend the hearing. The Commissioner can make a determination varying the amount of child support payable when: ▪ at least one of the special circumstances set out in s 105(2) of the Child Support Act 1991 is satisfied ▪ it is “just and equitable” for the child and all parties to the application that a determination be made: see L v W (1994) 16 NZTC 11,279 (CA), and ▪ it is “otherwise proper” that a determination be made: see C of IR v Cutbush (1994) 16 NZTC 11,307. Section 105(2) is an exhaustive list of the special circumstances that are able to be considered as grounds for a determination by the Commissioner or a Family Court departure order. The special circumstances all focus on economic considerations. The special circumstances covered by s 105(2) are as follows:  ▪ Where either parent’s ability to provide financial support is significantly reduced because of a duty to maintain another child or person, or the special needs of such a child or person, or the parent’s commitments to support themselves or another child or person. ▪ Where the costs of maintaining the child are significantly affected because of costs to enable access to the child being more than 5% of the year’s adjusted taxable income, or the special needs of the child, or the education or training of the child. ▪ Where the formula assessment would result in an unjust and inequitable result for the liable parent because of the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of either parent or the child, or a previous transfer or settlement of property, or the entitlement of the liable parent or receiving carer to continue to live in a property in which the liable parent or receiving carer still has a financial interest. ▪ Where the formula assessment would result in an unjust and inequitable result for the liable parent because the adjusted taxable income of a parent includes income from relevant additional work (being work done within three years of the parents ceasing to live together that is additional to that done before separation) and some or all of that income is used to reestablish that person. The three-year period excludes periods of resumed cohabitation with the motive of reconciliation if in aggregate they do not exceed three months. Note that the amount an order made on this ground excludes from the parent’s adjusted taxable income cannot exceed the lesser of the following: □ the amount of income from the additional work that is used, or will be used, by the parent for re-establishment costs □ 30% of the parent’s adjusted taxable income.  ▪ Where it would be just and equitable to offset one liability against another where two persons are liable to pay each other under a formula assessment. Some examples of circumstances that the courts have considered do not meet the requirements of s 105(2) are as follows: ▪ A liable parent having insufficient income to meet outgoings, unless there is something more to take the case out of the ordinary. See B v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,015. ▪ Factors such as responsibility for the pregnancy, lack of contact between the parents, and lack of contact between the child and the liable parent have no relevance in deciding the amount of child support. In addition, the income and financial position of a child’s step-parent do not amount to the requisite special circumstances and are not relevant considerations. See L v W (1994) 16 NZTC 11,279 (CA). ▪ The provision of an interest-free loan to the custodial parent by a liable parent did not create a situation in which it was unjust or inequitable for the liable parent to contribute, or in which special circumstances existed. See Hudson v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,594. ▪ The special circumstances have to be abnormal or unusual. It is not enough for the applicant to point to some degree of hardship. In a marriage break-up, the existence of hardship is commonplace. See C of IR v Short (1995) 17 NZTC 12,029. A departure order can be made where the court is satisfied that a trading structure or trust is being utilised to reduce a liable parent’s assessable income. See F v S HC Christchurch CIV-2010-40920979, 29 September 2011 and B v X (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-034. If a review officer considers that the issues raised by the application are too complex to be dealt with under the administrative review procedure, the officer may recommend that application be made to the Family Court for an order (see below).  For more information see Inland Revenue (IR) booklet IR 175, “Helping you to understand child support reviews” (August 2020). Applications by the Commissioner The Commissioner of Inland Revenue may initiate a review of a formula assessment of child support if, by virtue of special circumstances, the child support assessment would be unjust and inequitable because of the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of either parent or the child, and it would be just and equitable and otherwise proper to do so. A Commissioner-initiated review generally consists of the following stages: ▪ In the first instance, the Commissioner identifies that a parent (the subject parent) may be able to pay more child support than they are assessed for based on their financial circumstances. ▪ The Commissioner will then notify the subject parent that a determination may be appropriate, including a statement of the reasons why the Commissioner considers a determination may be appropriate, and advise them that he or she may make a written response. ▪ After considering any response from the subject parent, the Commissioner must then decide whether to start proceedings for an administrative review. If the review process is started, notice to that effect is given to the subject parent and any other parties involved. The other parties have the option of participating in the review process or stopping the review process. Only those other parties not receiving a social security benefit can stop the review. The subject parent and any other parties that elect to participate in the process will be asked to provide details of their income, assets and financial position, any information provided will be shared between them. IR organises the review process but the actual review is undertaken by an independent review officer appointed by IR (as for applications by the liable parent or receiving carer above).  Departure order by Family Court The Family Court also has the jurisdiction to make an order for a departure under the formula assessment, but applications for such orders can be made only when: ▪ the Commissioner has already made a determination ▪ the Commissioner has refused to make a determination, or ▪ another application involving the liable parent or the receiving carer is before the Family Court and it is appropriate to hear the two matters together. See IR booklet IR 174, “Helping you to understand child support and the Family Court” (August 2020). A departure order does not also allow for the making of an order to quash or remit child support payments that are in arrears. See C of IR v District Court at Waitakere (2005) 22 NZTC 19,088. In limited circumstances a departure order can be applied retrospectively. See B v X (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-034. Law: CHS Pts 6A, 6B, 7, ss 104–106B  ¶12-025 Notification, objection and collection of child support Notice of assessment The Commissioner must send a notice of assessment to each parent and receiving carer for each child support year and after making any assessment that changes the amount of child support payable. The notice must contain, as a minimum, the relevant matters identified in s 88A, but note that a notice may not reveal any more detail about a parent or a carer than their name and the person’s proportion of care and care cost percentage. The notice must contain sufficient information to enable the recipient to exercise his or her rights of objection in relation to the assessment and his or her right to apply to  the Commissioner for a determination under the administrative review procedure. Payment of child support A person liable to pay child support is entitled to choose the method of payment but, if he or she defaults, payments will have to be made by automatic deduction. If the person is a beneficiary, Work and Income deducts the child support payments before paying the benefit. Any amount of child support payable is a debt to the Crown. Child support is due and payable on the 20th of the month following the day it relates to. See ¶12-060 for a discussion of penalties on unpaid child support. Objections An objection can be made within 28 days from the date of the notice of an assessment. The Commissioner also has the discretion to accept a late objection. Standard practice statement SPS 10/03, “Acceptance of late objections under Section 92(2) of the Child Support Act 1991”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 61, sets out the Commissioner’s policy on the acceptance of late objections to assessments or decisions. Standard practice statement SPS 10/03 sets out a two-step approach in considering late objection requests. Under the first step, the Commissioner will consider the objector’s explanation for the lateness of the objection. A reasonable explanation is all that is required at this stage. Under the second step, the Commissioner will consider all the surrounding circumstances and decide whether, as a matter of fairness, the application should be allowed. An appendix to the standard practice statement sets out some of the factors that may be relevant in considering a late objection request under step two of the process. These factors are guidelines only and are not exhaustive. Factors that may support the acceptance of a late objection include: ▪ the apparent merit of the objection  ▪ the objector being absent during the 28-day objection period, and ▪ the objector falling ill. Omitting to lodge an objection because of an oversight by the objector or the objector’s advisor will not generally provide grounds for the Commissioner to exercise her discretion to accept a late objection. There are no appeal or objection rights under the Child Support Act if the Commissioner does not exercise her discretion to accept a late objection. However, the decision can be challenged by way of judicial review to the High Court. Grounds for objection The only grounds on which an objection to an assessment of child support may be made are that: ▪ the annual or monthly rate of financial support specified in the assessment has not been correctly calculated in accordance with the Child Support Act ▪ the assessment has incorrectly determined the days for which financial support is payable, or ▪ an annual rate of financial support specified in the assessment is not correctly assessed because the Commissioner has failed to give effect to a provision of the Act in relation to the assessment. Law: CHS ss 88, 88A, 91, 92, 129–133  ¶12-027 Child Support (Reciprocal Agreement with Australia) Order 2000 The Child Support (Reciprocal Agreement with Australia) Order 2000 applies when either the receiving carer or the liable parent lives in Australia and the other parent lives in New Zealand. The types of payments covered by the Order are:  ▪ formula-based child support ▪ voluntary arrangements, and ▪ court-awarded child and domestic maintenance. Briefly, the Order allows the governments of Australia and New Zealand to: ▪ enforce payment of child support and domestic maintenance owing in the other country, and ▪ supply each other with details of liable parents’ income and their addresses. Only the country in which the receiving carer and child live has the jurisdiction to issue assessments and make court orders. As a general rule, where a liable parent is living in Australia and he or she is meeting their child support liabilities in New Zealand, the case will not be referred to Australia for collection. A liable parent can continue making payments directly to the New Zealand Inland Revenue from Australia. The liable parent’s New Zealand child support liability will be calculated based on his or her overseas income and any New Zealand income. See ¶12-030.  ¶12-030 Liable parents for child support with overseas income When assessing a parent’s income, the Commissioner can include overseas income earned by that person, even if he or she is not resident in New Zealand for income tax purposes. If Inland Revenue (IR) has accepted an application for a formula assessment for a parent who is living outside New Zealand, the parent’s income for the purposes of the child support formula calculation is their combined overseas income and New Zealand income. The overseas income is converted to New Zealand dollars and may be adjusted for inflation. See ¶12-015.  Many overseas parents will receive an annual letter from IR requesting details of their income for child support purposes. Law: CHS s 39A  ¶12-038 Refunds and transfers of child support In cases where a person has overpaid child support payments to the Commissioner, the person can request a refund either verbally or in writing. So long as the person does not have any current or future liability to make further payments of child support, the Commissioner must refund the overpayment. If the refund is less than $5 and no request for a refund is made within 12 months of the person being entitled to it, the refund is transferred to the person’s tax account. With effect from 9 April 2020, all refunds must be made by way of direct credit to the liable person’s nominated bank account, unless this would result in undue hardship or is not practicable. Overpaid child support cannot be transferred out of the liable person’s child support account under the tax transfer provisions in the Tax Administration Act 1994. Law: CHS ss 216, 216A; TAA ss 173U, 184A  ¶12-039 Child support may constitute a charge Unpaid child support may constitute a charge on the person’s property under subpart 5 of Pt 3 of the Land Transfer Act 2017 and the Personal Property Securities Act 1999. This charge operates and takes priority according to the relevant registration Act. Registration of a charge over property for unpaid child support after the registration of a mortgage but before an advance of money secured by the mortgage has priority over the mortgage. The Commissioner must release the charge registered over the property when the unpaid child support is paid. A fee is not required to be paid by the Commissioner to either register or release a charge.  Law: CHS s 169(4)–(7)  Employers’ responsibilities ¶12-040 Employers’ responsibilities for child support — generally An employer or PAYE intermediary can be instructed by Inland Revenue (IR) to deduct child support payments from the salary or wages of employees and pay the amount deducted to IR where that employee is in default of their child support obligations. Usually, where child support deductions are required to be made by employers, the employer or PAYE intermediary will be contacted by IR to confirm the employee’s employment details. When this information has been provided, IR will issue a “child support deduction notice”. This notice requires the employer or PAYE intermediary to make child support deductions from the net pay of the employee. The notice contains the following information: ▪ employee’s name and IRD number ▪ the pay day or pay period when deductions are to commence, and ▪ amount to be deducted each pay day. IR also sends a copy of the child support deduction notice to the employee. Child support deductions have priority over any other deductions from an employee’s net pay (including student loan repayments). After deducting PAYE, the employer must deduct child support before anything else. If the amount of child support to be deducted changes during the year, IR will send another deduction notice that replaces the previous notice. The new notice will set out the new amount of child support to be deducted and the pay day on which the new deduction is to start.  Law: CHS Pt 10  ¶12-045 Employees’ protected net earnings for child support If an employee’s child support payments are made by way of deductions from his or her salary and wages, the employee must be allowed to keep at least 60% of his or her net earnings to cover living expenses. Employers (and PAYE intermediaries) must not deduct the full amount of child support if this would leave the employees with less than 60% of their net earnings (ie an employer cannot deduct more than 40% of their employee’s net earnings for child support). “Net earnings” are calculated as being the salary or wages remaining after deductions of tax, but before any other deductions are made for KiwiSaver, student loan repayments, insurance, etc. Thus, the protected net earnings only applies to child support. The other deductions must be made even if it is from the protected portion of the employee’s earnings. If a child support shortfall arises, the employer should not make up that shortfall in the next pay. Instead, Inland Revenue (IR) will follow up with the employee directly and arrange for the payment of the unpaid amount. Example 1: Full salary for the period is paid. The protected earnings are not affected. $ Weekly wage  420.00  PAYE deductions  60.74  Net earnings  359.26  Child support deduction  70.00  Balance  289.26  60% of net earnings of $359.26 is $215.56. The employee’s wage after deduction of child support is greater than $215.56. Consequently, the full amount of child support ($70) can be deducted.  Example 2: Less than the full salary is paid for a pay period resulting in the protected earnings being affected. This is because the employee took three days’ leave without pay in a week. $ Weekly wage  168.00  PAYE deductions  20.07  Net earnings  147.93  60% of $147.93  88.76  Balance  59.17  The child support deduction will be limited to $59.17, since deduction of the full $70 would leave the employee with less than 60% of his or her pay.  Liable parent has more than one employer Liable parents who have more than one employer have the option of having their total child support liability deducted from one source, even if it would result in net earnings of less than 60%. Employers can disregard the protected net earnings of 60% when the liable parent has more than one employer, provided the total deductions made by all the liable parent’s employers do not exceed 40%. In such cases, the Commissioner will advise the employer to disregard the protected net earnings provisions. Law: CHS ss 165, 166  ¶12-050 Paying child support deductions Employers (or PAYE intermediaries) pay any child support deductions when they pay their PAYE and other deductions — ie on the 20th of each month or, for large employers, on the 5th and 20th of each month (see ¶3-020). The details of the child support deductions made are included in the employment income information an employer must provide (see ¶3-023). Failure by an employer to  pay child support deductions may result in Inland Revenue imposing a penalty on the employer. See ¶12-060. Records An employer must keep all relevant records for at least seven years. Law: CHS ss 163, 168  ¶12-055 Child support variation codes If the actual amount of child support deducted differs from that stated in the child support deduction notice, it is necessary to give the appropriate code on the employment information form (IR 348). There are six codes: ▪ A (payment in advance) — if an employee is paid in advance (eg they will be on holiday on the next pay day), the amount deducted will be in excess of the amount required to be deducted for a particular pay period (all the deductions will be paid to Inland Revenue by the 20th of the following month (or, for a large employer who has made an election, on the 5th and 20th of the following month) and a reason for variation will need to be filed with this code) ▪ C (employee ceased employment) — if an employee leaves employment, an employer only has to deduct child support for the last full pay period during which the employee was employed, including any holiday pay owed (this code does not apply if the employee stops and restarts working with the same employer within the same month — in that case, use O below) ▪ D (previously deducted) — where child support has been deducted from a previous pay ▪ P (protected earnings) — where child support has not been deducted because the protected earnings (see ¶12-045) would be affected  ▪ S (short-term absence) — where an employee is on leave without pay for a short period of time and an employer is unable to deduct any, or all, of the child support amount, and ▪ O (other) — if child support has not been deducted or the amount deducted is different from what is expected and none of the above codes apply.  Offences and exemptions ¶12-060 Child support offences and penalties Late payment penalties If Inland Revenue (IR) does not receive payments of child support by the due date, late payment penalties will be charged. An initial penalty of 2% is payable on the day after the due date and then a further 8% if the amount remains outstanding seven days after the due date. A monthly incremental penalty of 2% is then payable on the balance outstanding every month, but this reduces after one year to 1% where an amount remains unpaid or not under a payment agreement. Relief from late payment penalties Mandatory relief The Commissioner must write off the 2% initial penalty and further 8% penalty applying seven days later if: ▪ the penalty relates to the liable parent’s first payment and the parent has entered into an instalment arrangement to repay the debt within three months of being assessed, or ▪ the penalty is no more than $5 and greater than the outstanding debt and the liable parent has no history of late payments. The Commissioner must, according to a prescribed timetable, write off any incremental penalties outstanding at the time that a payment  agreement is entered into between the Commissioner and a liable person for the repayment of any arrears and the ongoing payment of any current liabilities. If the payment agreement is adhered to, the accumulated penalties are written off on a pro rata basis every 26 weeks until the arrears have been paid in full. The Commissioner has the discretion to disregard non-payments under a payment arrangement in certain circumstances. There is also mandatory relief for ongoing incremental penalties where payment arrangements are being adhered to. Discretionary relief The Commissioner has a discretion to write off a penalty if the Commissioner is satisfied that any of the following situations apply: ▪ there was a “reasonable cause” for the delay in payment and the liable parent remedied this as soon as practicable. A “reasonable cause” for a delay means an event or circumstance beyond the control of the liable parent, including a serious illness, accident or disaster, that caused a reasonable delay in payment in the Commissioner’s opinion ▪ the delay in payment was due to, or caused directly or indirectly by, the failure of a person to make a deduction required to be made under Pt 10 of the Child Support Act 1991, the liable parent has taken reasonable action to mitigate those circumstances, and it would be fair and reasonable to grant relief ▪ the delay in payment was a result of an honest oversight by the liable parent, who paid the debt as soon as he or she discovered the oversight and who had no previous history of default in payments ▪ the delay in payment was a result of an error made by IR upon which the liable parent acted in good faith and altered his or her position in reliance of the error and it would be fair and reasonable to grant relief, or  ▪ the payee has waived the right to the payment the penalty relates to or has taken over responsibility for collecting the debt the penalty relates to and it would be fair and reasonable to grant relief. The Commissioner has the discretion to write off residual incremental penalties. The Commissioner may exercise this power when there is no current or future liability for financial support, all initial late payment penalties have been paid and the only outstanding amounts are incremental penalties. In that case the Commissioner can write off those remaining penalties if: ▪ it would be fair and reasonable to grant relief, or ▪ recovery of those residual penalties would place the liable person in serious hardship. Penalties are able to be fully or partly written off where a paying parent has agreed and adhered to an instalment arrangement and/or paid off the financial support debt, and where recovery of penalties would place the liable person in serious hardship or that it would be fair and reasonable to grant relief. Relief from penalties may also be available where there is no agreement between the Commissioner and the paying parent but the Commissioner has used her powers to require the person’s liabilities to be paid by way of automatic deduction. The Commissioner is also able to decline to enter into a payment agreement where the liable person has not complied with earlier payment agreements and no reasonable cause existed for the non-compliance. Standard practice statement Standard practice statement, SPS 19/05, “Options for relief from child support debt” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 73), replaced the previous SPS 11/02, “Child support debt — Requesting an instalment arrangement”, with effect from 21 November 2019. The SPS sets out the Commissioner’s practice for providing relief when the immediate payment of an overdue child support or domestic maintenance obligation is not possible. Relief is  provided in the form of an agreement to pay the debt in instalments, writing off penalties in certain situations or, in limited circumstances, writing off part or all of the child support debt. Offences Failure to notify the Commissioner of the cessation of eligibility for an exemption from child support, a change in living circumstances or a change of address, falsifying records or obstructing an IR officer in carrying out his or her duties under the Act is an offence. Such offences carry a fine of up to $2,000 on the first occasion, $4,000 on the second occasion and $6,000 on every subsequent occasion. Anyone who aids, abets, incites or conspires with any other person to commit an offence under the Act is liable to a fine. If the Commissioner has reasonable cause to believe that a liable person is about to leave New Zealand with the intention of avoiding paying child support, the Commissioner can make a request to the District Court for an arrest warrant for the liable person. The liable person must then be brought before the District Court as soon as possible. The court may make any one or more of the following orders: ▪ that the liable person give security for the payment of child support ▪ that the liable person not leave New Zealand without the written authority of the court, or ▪ that the liable person surrender to the court any tickets or travel documents in his or her possession. The procedural requirements relating to this process were considered by the High Court in C of IR v C (2004) 21 NZTC 18,629. If a person leaves, or attempts to leave, New Zealand without the Court’s authority when an order not to do so is in force, they commit an offence and are liable to imprisonment for up to three months or a fine not exceeding $2,000.  Information sharing rules between IR and the New Zealand Customs Service, which came into effect on 1 April 2009, assist IR to track the New Zealand movements of liable parents living overseas. If a liable parent living overseas is known to be visiting New Zealand, effective steps can be taken against that person to recover outstanding liabilities before the person leaves New Zealand again. See ¶1-606 and ¶1-609. Penalties for offences by payers of child support Payers other than employers who are required to make deductions of child support remain liable for criminal prosecution for an offence but are not liable to pay interest or civil penalties. Criminal prosecution can bring about a penalty on conviction of up to $25,000 for a first offence and up to $50,000 thereafter. Deductions in excess of protected net earnings An employer may not deduct more than 40% of a liable person’s ordinary net pay after tax (unless the liable person has more than one employer: see ¶12-045). If the employer makes a deduction in excess of protected net earnings, he or she commits an offence. The employer may then be liable for a fine of up to $2,000 for the first offence, $4,000 on the second occasion and $6,000 thereafter. Disclosing information An employer and any employee or agent are prohibited from disclosing any information about an employee’s child support obligations. This is subject to two exceptions. These are when the child support agency has requested information and when an employer is required to supply the information as part of running his or her business. On conviction, an employer could be liable to a fine of up to $15,000 for the first offence and up to $25,000 thereafter. Also see C of IR v B (2001) 20 NZTC 17,043 regarding the disclosure of information under Pt 6A of the Child Support Act and under the Privacy Act 1993. Discrimination against an employee  It is an offence under the Child Support Act for an employer to discriminate against an employee or potential employee because of his or her child support obligations. Law: CHS ss 134–135O, 170, 171, 172, 199, 208, 210; TAA ss 120B, 143A, 145, 157A  ¶12-065 Child support exemptions There are four exemptions from the payment of child support. The exemptions are for: ▪ long-term hospital patients (ie those who are hospitalised for a continuous period of 13 weeks or more) ▪ long-term prison inmates (ie those who are imprisoned for a continuous period of 13 weeks or more) ▪ liable parents under 16 years of age, and ▪ victims of sex offences under the Crimes Act 1961. To qualify for the long-term hospital patient or prisoner exemption, the liable parent has to apply to the Commissioner using the appropriate form (IR 105) with an estimate of his or her income during the relevant period. Where that person’s child support liability is calculated using the standard formula, the person must have either earned no income while a patient or prisoner, or their income must not have exceeded the relevant minimum weekly rate of child support during that period and be solely from investments or, in the case of a patient, their only income is a benefit. If they have a voluntary agreement or court order, the requirements are the same except that income earned from investments must average $10 a week or less. For further information, see Inland Revenue leaflets IR 154, “Child support — prisoners”, and IR 148, “Child support — hospital patients”. The exemption for liable parents under 16 years of age is a temporary exemption from making child support payments (until they  turn 16) if the eligible parent’s income during the exemption period is nil or is sourced solely from investments and does not exceed the relevant minimum weekly rate of child support (or is on average $10 a week or less if paying under a voluntary agreement or court order). The exemption for victims of sex offences is a permanent exemption from making child support payments. With effect from 27 June 2019, the Commissioner has the discretion to grant an exemption to the victim of a sex offence in cases when there is not a convicted offender. The Commissioner also has the discretion to determine the most appropriate start date for the exemption, provided the date is on or after 26 September 2006. Law: CHS ss 89A–89ZE  FAMILY SCHEME ¶12-110 Introduction to Working for Families Tax Credits The family scheme comprises a series of “tax credits” for families with dependent children and for low- and middle-income earning families, referred to by Inland Revenue (IR) as “Working for Families Tax Credits”. The tax credits are actually refundable tax credits, which, if they exceed the person’s income tax liability, are able to be refunded to the taxpayer. See ¶2-110 and ¶11-010. “WFF tax credits” comprise the following credits: ▪ family tax credit — this is a credit of tax paid for each dependent child ▪ in-work tax credit — this credit for families with dependent children is available to sole parents who work (before 1 July 2020, at least 20 hours a week) and couples that work (before 1 July 2020, at least 30 hours a week between them) ▪ minimum family tax credit — this credit ensures a minimum annual family income for those families falling below the  threshold where a sole parent works at least 20 hours a week and couples work at least 30 hours a week between them, and ▪ Best Start tax credit — this credit provides a weekly amount per child to help with the costs in a child’s early years. The family tax credit and the in-work tax credit are grouped together and abated as a family’s income increases, giving an amount referred to in the legislation as an “abating WFF tax credit”. Note that the Best Start tax credit also abates, but only in the second and third years, and it is not included within an “abating WFF tax credit”. To calculate the amount of Working for Families tax credits (WFF tax credits) that a person is entitled to receive, that person’s net income (or net loss) for tax purposes may need to be adjusted to take account of certain items that are not usually included when determining income for tax purposes. Accordingly, despite the system of taxpayer self-assessment, the Commissioner calculates WFF tax credits. Refunds arising from the tax credits for families may be received at year-end upon filing an annual return, or by way of interim instalments paid either weekly or fortnightly. Payments are administered either by IR or, where eligible persons are in receipt of income-tested benefits, the department responsible for the Social Security Act 2018, Work and Income New Zealand. See also IR leaflet IR 201, “Working and raising a family?”, December 2020. Law: IT07 subparts MB–MG, MZ, s MC 1  ¶12-120 Eligibility to receive WFF tax credits Eligibility to receive the family tax credit, the in-work tax credit, the Best Start tax credit and the minimum family tax credit (together referred to as “WFF tax credits”) depends on whether a person is the principal caregiver of a dependent child for an entitlement period in a tax year.  An entitlement period is an unbroken period during which all of the following criteria are met: ▪ the person meets the qualifying criteria on each day of the period (see below) ▪ the person’s marital, civil union or de facto status remains the same ▪ the person’s status as a “principal caregiver” remains the same (see below) ▪ the status of the child or children to whom the claim for family assistance relates as a “dependent child” remains the same (see below) ▪ the composition of a WFF tax credit does not change, other than on the first or the last day of the eligible period, and ▪ the person does not stop or start receiving the protected family tax credit (except on the first or last day as appropriate). A taxpayer can have a number of entitlement periods within a specified period. For example, if one child in a family ceases to be dependent, there will be two eligible periods — the first up to the date of independence of the child, and the second from the date of independence to the following 31 March. Similarly, there will be different eligible periods if a taxpayer’s relationship status changes, a new child is born, or the taxpayer becomes or ceases to be the principal caregiver. Qualifying criteria A person qualifies if that person: ▪ is aged 16 years of age or over ▪ is a principal caregiver of one or more dependent children ▪ is—  □ not a transitional resident (and is not the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner of a transitional resident), and has been both resident and present in New Zealand for a continuous period of 12 months at any time and is tax resident in New Zealand on the date family assistance is claimed, or the dependent child being cared for is both resident and present in New Zealand, or □ from 1 April 2020, entitled to receive an emergency benefit under ss 63 or 64 of the Social Security Act 2018 (see below) ▪ does not receive a parent’s allowance continued by of sch 1, cl 3 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014 or a children’s pension under s 72 or s 75 of that Act. A person who receives an income-tested benefit during the period will also not qualify for an in-work tax credit or minimum family tax credit. A person will also not qualify for a Best Start tax credit if they receive a parental leave payment or preterm baby payment under Pt 7A of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987. A “New Zealand resident” is defined as a person who is ordinarily resident in New Zealand. A person who is unlawfully resident or lawfully resident by a visitor’s permit, a temporary work permit or a tertiary study permit is excluded from being a resident. For the purposes of calculating a WFF tax credit, a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner does not include a separated person. From 1 April 2020, as part of the Coalition Government’s package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus, amendments have been made to allow people on a temporary visa, who would not otherwise meet the WFF residency criteria, to qualify for WFF tax credits if the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) has granted them an emergency benefit. In general, to receive a main benefit (including an emergency benefit), a person must be a New Zealand  citizen or permanent resident and have resided in New Zealand for at least two years since becoming a citizen or resident. However, the MSD has the discretion to grant an emergency benefit in other circumstances when those residency criteria are not met. The new provisions ensure that emergency benefit recipients with dependent children who are on a temporary visa are able to qualify for the same WFF payment as other beneficiaries, namely the family tax credit and Best Start. Principal caregiver A “principal caregiver” is defined as a person who, in the Commissioner’s opinion, has the primary responsibility for the dayto-day care of a dependent child other than on a temporary basis. The principal caregiver does not need to be the dependent child’s parent. Excluded from the definition of principal caregiver is any unincorporated or corporate body of persons or any person who is a proprietor of or an employee in a home, institution or residence in which the child is cared for. Example: Peter is unable to look after his children as work commitments require him to travel extensively around the country. Accordingly, an arrangement has been made for his children to live with Peter’s sister in Australia. Peter sends money to his sister each week to meet the costs of care. The Commissioner considers that in such circumstances Peter does not fulfil the role of the children’s “principal caregiver” and consequently cannot be a person who qualifies for WFF tax credits. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 4, October 1995 at 22.  For the purpose of calculating the amount of WFF tax credits a person is entitled to in a specified period and, in particular, for determining a person’s eligibility for an in-work tax credit, the definition of a “principal caregiver” is extended. The extended definition operates to cover the situation where there is joint custody of dependent children between two qualifying persons (see further below). Dependent child  A “dependent child”, for a child and a person, is a “child”: ▪ whose care is the primary responsibility of the person ▪ who is maintained as a member of the person’s family ▪ who is financially dependent on the person ▪ who is not a child for whom orphan’s benefit or unsupported child’s benefit is being paid, and ▪ who is not a child for whom payments are being made under s 363 of the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989, or ▪ who is a child for whom payments are being made under s 363 of the Oranga Tamariki Act and is a child or a young person, as defined in s 2(1) of that Act: □ of whom the person is a parent within the meaning of that Act, and □ to whom s 361 of that Act applies, and □ who, under s 362 of that Act, is placed in the charge of the person. For the purposes of the Best Start tax credit a dependent child will include a child for whom a person receives payments under s 363 of the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989 or an orphan or unsupported child benefit. Child A “child” is defined as a person who is not in a marriage, civil union, or de facto relationship and who is: ▪ aged 15 years or under, or ▪ aged 16 or 17 years and is not financially independent, or  ▪ aged 18 years and is a person for whom a credit of tax is allowed under s MD 1 (abating WFF tax credits) or both ss MD 1 and ME 1 (minimum family tax credit). The Commissioner may allow a tax credit for a dependent child who reaches the age of 18 but is not financially independent and still attending a school or tertiary institution. To be “financially independent”, the child will be: ▪ in full employment (ie employed under a contract of service or apprenticeship for at least 30 hours a week on average, selfemployed for at least 30 hours a week on average, or employed under a contract or award for any number of hours that is regarded as full-time employment) ▪ in receipt of a student allowance ▪ in receipt of payments under a Government-assisted scheme analogous to benefits payable under the Social Security Act 2018 (see below) ▪ in receipt of a benefit as defined in sch 2 of the Social Security Act (eg a monetary benefit payable under the Social Security Act, and includes jobseeker support, sole parent support, orphan’s benefit, unsupported child’s benefit, supported living payment, emergency benefit, an incentive payment, a youth payment, a young parent payment, an accommodation supplement, winter energy payment, a child disability allowance, childcare assistance, temporary additional support and a disability allowance, or New Zealand superannuation or a veteran’s pension), or ▪ in receipt of New Zealand superannuation equivalent assistance or veteran’s pension equivalent assistance. Joint custody arrangements When the parents of a dependent child live apart, the eligibility of each parent to receive a WFF tax credit depends on each parent’s  ability to qualify as a principal caregiver. Section MC 10(2) requires that for a separated person to qualify as a principal caregiver, that person must have exclusive care of the dependent child for at least one-third of: ▪ a four-month period, or ▪ the tax year. For example, if a parent has the child for only two days a week, he or she will not qualify as a principal caregiver. When considering a separated person’s eligibility for the in-work tax credit, the criteria relating to the care of that child are considered for the periods during which that parent has exclusive care of the child. That person must have the child in their exclusive care for periods totalling at least one-third of a four-month period or the tax year. The periods of exclusive care do not need to coincide with the parent’s entitlement period. When a separated person is entitled to a WFF tax credit, only the family tax credit and the Best Start tax credit are apportioned on the basis of the time that a dependent child spends with another qualifying person during the entitlement period. If two people are eligible for an in-work tax credit in relation to a child, the amount of the credit that one person is entitled to is not affected by the other person’s eligibility. A person is required to immediately inform the Commissioner of any changes in the arrangements for the care of a dependent child that ends or will end that person’s status as a principal caregiver. Couples with different dependent children In some cases, a couple will be married, in a civil union or de facto relationship and have dependent children from another relationship. In such cases, the Commissioner will determine which parent of that couple is entitled to the WFF tax credits. QWBA  In February 2016, Inland Revenue released a QWBA, QB 16/01, “Income tax, Working for families tax credits — principal caregiver — dependent child — primary responsibility for day-to-day care — meaning of temporary basis” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 124). This item considers whether a person looking after a child on a temporary basis can become eligible to receive WFF tax credits. The item acknowledges that, to be eligible for WFF tax credits, a person needs to meet a number of requirements, including that they are the principal caregiver of a dependent child, and provides guidance on the “principal caregiver” and “dependent child” requirements. The item concludes that generally a person who is caring for a child on a temporary basis would not be eligible for WFF tax credits because they would probably not meet the principal caregiver requirement, and also the child would likely not be their dependent child. Law: IT07 ss MA 8, MC 2–MC 11, MD 4(2), YA 1  ¶12-125 Calculation of family scheme income for WFF tax credits The amount of Working for Families tax credits (WFF tax credits) available to a person is calculated on the basis of a person’s “family scheme income”. A person’s family scheme income is their net income with adjustments as provided for in subpart MB. Income derived at a uniform daily rate When calculating a person’s family scheme income for a relationship period (ie an unbroken period in a tax year) for WFF tax credit purposes, income derived from employment, from an income-tested benefit or from other sources is treated as having been derived at a uniform daily rate throughout the period of employment, period of receipt of the benefit or the income year, as the case may be. Similarly, any expenditure incurred in deriving the other sources of income is treated as having been incurred at a uniform daily rate throughout the income year. Income-tested benefit  An income-tested benefit is any of the following: ▪ sole parent support ▪ emergency benefit ▪ supported living payment ▪ jobseeker support ▪ young parent payment, and ▪ youth payment. An income-tested benefit also includes main benefit equivalent assistance, which is special assistance granted under the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support (NZSOS) Programme that corresponds to any of the benefits set out above. The NZSOS Programme enables payments to be made to New Zealand beneficiaries who are stranded overseas as a result of COVID-19, as these individuals would otherwise lose entitlement to their normal payments. Payments made under the NZSOS Programme are subject to the same tax treatment as their standard counterparts. Income for period greater than or less than 12 months If a person is returning income for tax purposes for a period greater than or less than 12 months (usually because of a change in balance date), their family scheme income for that particular year will be adjusted using the following formula in s MB 2: person’s family scheme income × 365 ÷ days where: person’s family scheme income is the person’s income calculated under subparts MB–MF and MZ, and days is the total number of days in the period for which the income has been derived.  For example, a person’s income for a 375-day period in an income year would be reduced by the following fraction: 365 375 A person’s net income (or net loss) for tax purposes may need to be recalculated for the purposes of determining their family scheme income. This recalculation takes the form of adjustments. Exempt income Certain exempt income is added back to a person’s net income for the purposes of calculating family scheme income: ▪ spousal maintenance or child support, or a payment in the nature of maintenance from a former or current spouse, civil union or de facto partner ▪ income from an overseas pension to the extent that a deduction has been made by Work and Income New Zealand against a monetary benefit, excluding New Zealand superannuation or a veteran’s pension ▪ an amount of salary or wages that is exempt from income tax under the Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act 1979, Consular Privileges and Immunities Act 1971, Diplomatic Privileges Act 1968, International Finance Agreements Act 1961 or Pitcairn Trials Act 2002. Trustee income Trustee income and trust-controlled company income are included in a person’s family scheme income when that person is a settlor of a trust (other than by virtue of providing professional services for less than market value in the administration of the trust or the maintenance of the trust property). The definition of “settlor” is that used in the trust rules. The definition is wide and includes any person who transfers value to or for the benefit of the trust or on the terms of the trust.  There are a number of exceptions. Trustee income is not included in the definition of family scheme income if: ▪ the trust is registered as a charitable entity under the Charities Act 2005 ▪ the trust is solely for the benefit of a local authority ▪ interest and dividends derived by the trust are exempt income under s CW 45 (Funeral trusts) ▪ the trust is a superannuation fund ▪ the person and members of the person’s family are not entitled to benefit under the trust except under a court order. The person’s family scheme income for the income year includes the amount calculated using the following formula: (trustee income + companies income) ÷ settlor number where: trustee income is the net income of the trustee for the income year, reduced to not less than zero by trustee income vested or paid by the trustee as beneficiary income for the year companies income is the greater of zero, and the total amounts calculated under the formula below for each company in which the trustee and associated persons of the trustee hold voting interests of 50% or more on the last day of the income year, and settlor number is the number of settlors of the trust who are alive at any time in the income year and to whom s MB 7 applies. For the item “companies income”, an amount to be totalled is calculated for each relevant company using the following formula: trustee’s interest × (income − dividends) where:  trustee’s interest is the percentage voting interests for the relevant company held by the trustee on the last day of the company’s income year income is the net income of the relevant company for that income year, and dividends is the total dividends paid by the relevant company for that income year. Example 1:  In this example, John is the sole settlor of Family Trust. Family Company is wholly owned by Family Trust. Family Company’s net income is $200,000 and it pays an imputed dividend of $100,000 to Family Trust. Family Trust also earns income of $30,000 from investments. Family Trust distributes $10,000 as beneficiary income to John’s family. John’s family scheme income for the income year is calculated as follows: Trustee income  $100,000 dividend + $30,000 debt investment income  less $10,000 beneficiary income = $120,000 Companies 100% trustee’s interest × ($200,000 net income − $100,000 dividend) income = $100,000 (trustee income + companies income) ÷ settlor number = ($120,000 + $100,000) ÷ 1 Total  = $220,000  Therefore, $220,000 is included in John’s family scheme income for the income year.  Non-beneficiary income from a trust With effect from 26 June 2019, non-beneficiary income from a trust is included within family scheme income when the person is not a settlor. However, the Commissioner may determine the circumstances in which such a payment should be excluded from family scheme income and if the payment is received in such circumstances, it will not be included. Fringe benefits of controlling shareholders The taxable value of attributable fringe benefits where an employee shareholder and any associated person holds 50