 2020 to 17 March 2021. In addition, Determination EE002A removed all references to the requirement that the employee is working from home as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, for the extended period of application of Determination EE002, the determination applies to any employee that works from home regardless of whether they do so as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Note that, with the exception of these variations, the other requirements of Determination EE002 (discussed above) continue to apply. In February 2021, the Commissioner recognised that the public statement would not be ready before 17 March 2021, the expiry date of Determination EE002A. Consequently, Inland Revenue released Determination EE002B: Variation to Determination EE002A – Payments to employees for working from home costs. Determination EE002B extends the application date of Determination EE002A by six months to apply to payments made from 18 March 2021 to 30 September 2021.  Private or domestic expenditure As a general rule, when an employee is reimbursed by an employer for expenditure incurred on account of the employer (ie the employer’s business), that amount is not taxable to the employee. However, where an employee is reimbursed for expenditure incurred for his or her benefit (ie for his or her own private or domestic purposes), that amount is employment income and taxable to the employee. Consequently, a reimbursing allowance paid to an employee to cover expenditure incurred by the employee for private or domestic purposes is taxable to the employee (or subject to FBT, if the allowance is in nonmonetary form). Reasonable estimate Instead of reimbursing actual expenditure incurred by an employee for business purposes, an allowance may be paid to the employee in anticipation of expenses incurred in relation to the employer’s business activity. Employers can base a tax-free allowance on a reasonable estimate of the work-related expenditure likely to be incurred by an employee or a group of employees for related pay periods. In practice, some of the methods that could be used to show that the payment is reasonable are: ▪ carrying out a survey of expenditure incurred by the employees ▪ adopting an industry average agreed upon by Inland Revenue (IR) and representatives of industry, or ▪ following a public statement issued by IR on that class of allowance. The exemption provided in s CW 17(2) exempts an amount that would, in the absence of the exemption, be taxable in the hands of the employee. A reimbursing allowance that is paid regularly to an employee could constitute income, hence the need for the exemption when the allowance is simply to reimburse the employee for costs incurred in the course of their employment. QWBA on allowances for chainsaw operators  On 29 September 2015, the Commissioner released a question we’ve been asked (QWBA) QB 15/08, “Income tax — Tax treatment of allowances paid to chainsaw operators”, which replaces two earlier Public Information Bulletin items and considers whether an employer can pay a tax-free allowance to an employee for using a chainsaw in their work. The QWBA concludes that an employer can pay a tax-free allowance, but only to the extent that the allowance is a reimbursing allowance for expenses the employee incurs or is likely to incur in using their own chainsaw for work. Any amount paid to the employee over the reimbursing allowance is taxable to the employee as employment income and subject to PAYE. A chainsaw reimbursing allowance can cover operating expenses such as interest, insurance, repair and maintenance costs, and consumables (such as chains, petrol, twostroke oil and chain oil). It can also include an amount for the depreciation of the chainsaw where the employee owns the chainsaw. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 10, November 2015 at 15. QWBA on first aid allowances On 7 December 2015, the Commissioner released QWBA, QB 15/15, “Income tax — first aid allowances”, which considers whether allowances paid by employers to employees who are designated first aiders in workplaces are taxable. The item concludes that an allowance paid by an employer to an employee because they hold a first aid qualification is taxable as employment income under s CE 1(1)(a), and subject to PAYE. It is not paid to reimburse the employee for expenditure incurred in connection with their employment duties; rather it is a regular amount paid to the employee because they are first aid qualified and take on obligations to provide first aid services in the workplace if required. However, if a regular allowance or one-off payment is made to the employee to reimburse them for first aid related costs incurred in performing their first aid obligations or duties in the workplace (eg the cost of getting a first aid qualification, if this is required, or keeping a first aid kit up-to-date), this would be exempt income under s CW 17(2). This is because the payment is reimbursing the employee for expenditure the employee would be able to deduct if the employment limitation did not exist. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 75. QWBA on allowances for farm workers  In June 2018, the Commissioner released QWBA, QB 18/13, “Income tax — what is the tax treatment of allowances paid and benefits provided to farm workers?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 137), which considers the income tax treatment of allowances and benefits paid to employees in a farming context. Reimbursing allowances are generally not taxable. Benefit allowances, where an employer pays an amount to an employee to compensate them for the conditions of their service (such as using dangerous equipment, working in a dangerous or dirty environment, or working in a remote location), are generally taxable. The QWBA contains the following table that lists examples of the types of allowances paid to farm workers. The reimbursement allowances in the table are exempt only to the extent that they do not reimburse private expenses or capital expenses (subject to the low value asset rules (that is, they are below the relevant limit ($500 at the time of the QWBA))). Category  Payment or benefit provided  Type of allowance  Tax Treatment Farm worker  Employer  Working dogs  Allowance for food, registration or vet bills  Reimbursing Exempt allowance  Deductible  Horses  Allowance for Reimbursing Exempt food, saddlery allowance and accessories (less than $500), saddlery repairs, vet or farrier’s bills  Deductible  Category  Payment or benefit provided  Type of allowance  Tax Treatment Farm worker  Employer  Motor Allowance for Reimbursing Exempt bikes and depreciation, allowance quad bikes interest, fuel, tyres (less than $500), servicing or repairs  Deductible  Protective clothing  Allowance for purchase (less than $500) of protective clothing such as boots, chaps, leggings, gloves, and hearing or eye protection  Reimbursing Exempt allowance  Deductible  Wet weather gear  Allowance for Reimbursing Exempt purchase (less allowance than $500) of wet weather gear, such as waterproof coats, hats and leggings  Deductible  Category  Payment or benefit provided  Type of allowance  Tax Treatment Farm worker  Employer  Shearing Allowance for equipment acquisition (less than $500) of handpieces or shearing equipment, repairs and maintenance and depreciation of equipment  Reimbursing Exempt allowance  Deductible  Boarding school fees  School boarding away allowance  Benefit allowance  Taxable  Deductible  Travel costs  Reimbursement Reimbursing Exempt of work travel allowance  Deductible  Rations Provisions of Non-cash and stores stores and benefit rations, meat or farm produce  Remote location  Not FBT assessable (subject to exemptions) Deductible  Payment in lieu Benefit of stores and allowance rations  Taxable  Deductible  Allowance for Benefit working in a allowance remote location  Taxable  Deductible  Category  Payment or benefit provided  Dangerous Allowance for or dirty working in a conditions dangerous or dirty environment  Type of allowance Benefit allowance  Tax Treatment Farm worker Taxable  Employer Deductible  Law: IT07 s CW 17  ¶3-445 Travel allowances An employer may reimburse an employee for using a private vehicle for work-related purposes. The reimbursements are tax free to the employee if the requirements of s CW 17 are met. In accordance with s CW 17 employers can choose either to reimburse: ▪ actual costs incurred by the employee ▪ a reasonable estimate of the costs incurred by the employee ▪ published mileage rates, or ▪ Inland Revenue’s (IR) published rates. In Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 135, the Commissioner announced that employers may start using rates published by a reputable independent New Zealand source, eg New Zealand Automobile Association Inc, as an alternative to IR’s published rates. Any alternative mileage rates used must be a reasonable estimate given the nature of the business and the type of vehicles involved. IR’s published rates are set out in ¶50-084. It is important to note that the distance to which the mileage rate is applied is work-related mileage only, and not the total distance travelled by the vehicle for the year. A record needs to be maintained of the dates the vehicle is used, the mileage and the destination.  Reimbursements made in excess of the calculated amounts will be employment income to the employee and subject to PAYE. IR published rates On 16 August 2019, the Commissioner issued operational statement, OS 19/04b “Commissioner’s statement on using a kilometre rate for employee reimbursement of a motor vehicle” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 85). (See also ¶10-710 for a discussion of OS 19/04a, “Commissioner’s statement on using a kilometre rate for business running of a motor vehicle – deductions”, which explains how the kilometre rates are to be applied for deductions for the business use of a vehicle.) OS 19/04b explains the acceptable method to establish the tax exempt portion of reimbursements to employees for the business running of an employee’s motor vehicle. The statement accepts that the kilometre rate set under the statement can be regarded as being a reasonable estimate of expenditure under s CW 17. The statement sets out the following operational practice and rates for the 2018–19 income year: Vehicle Type  Tier One Rate  Tier Two rate  Petrol or Diesel  79 cents  30 cents  Petrol Hybrid  79 cents  19 cents  Electric  79 cents  9 cents  ▪ Where the employee maintains a logbook, or other evidence that establishes the proportion of employment use for an income year, the calculation of the exempt portion may be based on the IR’s rates. The Tier One rate can be applied for the business portion of the first 14,000 kms (total) travelled by the vehicle in each income year, after which the Tier Two rates will apply. Note that even where the employee records a logbook test period in accordance with the rules in ss DE 6 to DE 11, the annual kilometres travelled must still be monitored so that it is known whether the 14,000 figure is reached each year. ▪ However, where no logbook or other records are maintained, the use of the Tier One rate to calculate the exemption for employee  reimbursement is limited to the first 3,500 kms travelled for employment purposes. The Tier Two rates may be used for kilometres travelled for employment purposes above the 3,500 km figure. ▪ The 3,500 kms is based on 25% of the average annual expected (14,000) kilometres travelled for each motor vehicle. 25% is the maximum percentage allowed for business deductions where no logbook is maintained. ▪ The changes to the business deductions take effect for the 2018 income year onwards and require a different approach and calculation of those rates. IR accepts that the changes with regard to employee reimbursement will always be subject to a time lag using those figures. As such, for the 2019–20 income year employers may reimburse employees using the above 2018–19 rates from the date of the statement, 16 August 2019. OS 19/04b includes the following examples using the kilometre rate method to calculate employee reimbursement for the 2019–20 income year: Example 1: Single journey — no logbook Employee used their private vehicle for a single 65 km journey for their employment and did not maintain a logbook. They are entitled to treat any reimbursement as tax free for the first 3,500 employment-related kilometres at the Tier One rate. The employer must keep a record of how many employment-related kilometres are travelled in the income year (for that vehicle) because any kilometres over 3,500 will only be tax free calculated at the Tier Two rate. The calculation (assuming the 3,500 km figure was not breached) would be: 65 km x 0.79 cents (the Tier One rate) = $51.35 tax free reimbursement  Example 2: Regular journey — no logbook Employee used their private vehicle, a petrol-powered motor vehicle, for a regular 65 km journey for their employment and did not maintain a logbook. They are entitled to treat any reimbursement as tax free for the first 3,500 employment-related kilometres at the Tier One rate.  The employer must keep a record of how many employment-related kilometres are travelled in the income year (for that vehicle) because any kilometres over 3,500 will only be tax free calculated at the Tier Two rate. The calculation (assuming the 3,500 km figure was breached two months earlier) would be: 65 km x 0.30 cents (the Tier Two rate) = $19.50 tax free reimbursement  Example 3: Regular journey — trial logbook Employee used their private vehicle, a petrol hybrid-powered motor vehicle, for a regular 65 km journey for their employment and did maintain a logbook (albeit for a three-month trial period). Employee’s logbook evidences that the vehicle is used 40% for employmentrelated purposes and 60% for private/other use. They are entitled to treat any reimbursement as tax free for the first 40% of the vehicle’s total kilometres up to the first 14,000 at the Tier One rate. The employee must notify the employer when the annual kilometres reaches 14,000. This is because any kilometres from that point on will only be tax free calculated at the Tier Two rate. Alternatively, the employer could keep a record of the employment kilometres and use the Tier Two calculation once the claim reached 5,600 kilometres (40% of 14,000). Using this alternative approach will mean that the employee will not need to keep any records beyond the three-month trial logbook period. The calculation (assuming the 5,600 km figure was breached two months earlier) would be: 65km x 0.19 cents (the Tier Two rate) = $12.35 tax free reimbursement  OS 19/04 (KM 2020) For the 2019–20 income year, the Commissioner originally advised that taxpayers could use the 2019 kilometre rates: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32 No 5, June 2020 at 23. This was a result of COVID-19 meaning the Commissioner had not received third party information to determine the 2020 kilometre rates. Therefore, taxpayers could use the 2019 rates and adjust their 2020 income tax returns under s 113 or 113A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 if there was a material difference from the final 2020 rates. In December 2020, the Commissioner released the following table of rates for the 2020 income year in OS 19/04 (KM 2020): Vehicle Type  Tier One Rate  Petrol or Diesel 82 cents  Tier Two rate 28 cents  Petrol Hybrid  82 cents  17 cents  Electric  82 cents  9 cents  Allowance for additional transport costs Any reimbursing allowance paid by an employer to an employee for additional transport costs is exempt to the extent that it meets the following criteria: ▪ it is paid for costs incurred in travelling between the employee’s home and place of work, and ▪ the costs were incurred by the employee for the benefit and convenience of the employer, and ▪ the costs were attributable to one or more of the following workrelated factors: □ Time of work — this refers to the time of day or days of the week the employee is required to work whereby the employee might incur additional transport costs. Example 4: Sandra has a job as a commercial cleaner. She travels by bus to start work at 8 pm and finishes at midnight, by which time the buses to her suburb no longer run. She travels home by taxi.  □ Carrying work equipment — this refers to the need to carry goods or material for use or disposal in the course of the employee’s work. Example 5: Aroha works for a catering company. On occasions, the company vehicle is double-booked. When this happens, Aroha uses her own van to deliver food to a function.  □ Fulfilling statutory obligations.  □ Temporary change in place of work — this refers to a temporary change from the normal place of work of an employee in relation to the same employer. Example 6: Sam works for a bank. He is assigned to work at another branch across town for eight months. He incurs the cost of an additional bus trip for that period.  □ Any other condition of work — this is a catch-all type of factor. Example 7: Peter usually buses into work, but his employer requests that he bring in his car to carry out an occasional delivery while the company car is in the workshop.  □ The absence of a public passenger transport service — a public passenger transport service must adequately serve the place of work. Generally, this means that the public transport service must run near the place of work, adequately synchronise with the hours of work and be able to carry sufficient numbers of the workers who might use the service. Once it is established that the additional transport costs are attributable to at least one of the above six factors, the employer may make an estimate of the additional component of those transport costs. Note that it is only the “additional” component of the employee’s transport costs that qualifies for the tax exemption. If any of the first five factors are responsible for the additional transport costs, then the costs in excess of those that the employee would ordinarily have been expected to incur in travelling between home and work, were it not for that factor, are taken as the additional component of the transport costs. Example 8:  An employee who normally buses to work at a cost of $1.50 a day is required to use his or her car to take tools to and from work, at a cost of $5 a day. The employee would be eligible to have his or her reimbursing allowance exempted to the extent of: $5 − $1.50 = $3.50 a day.  A different calculation must be made when the sixth factor (ie absence of a public passenger transport system) is responsible for the additional transport costs. In such cases, the additional component for each day is the actual travelling costs less $5. An amount calculated in accordance with that formula would be eligible for exemption. However, it is important to note that there is a proviso in relation to employees who must travel long distances. This proviso is to the effect that the cost of travelling distances of more than 70 km a day may not be taken into account in calculating the additional component unless special circumstances exist. Operational statement on employer-provided travel In December 2019, Inland Revenue released operational statement OS 19/05, “Employer-provided travel from home to a distant workplace – income tax (PAYE) and fringe benefit tax” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 84), which clarifies and simplifies the tax rules for employer-related travel to distant workplaces. Payments made by an employer in relation to a private expense of an employee are usually subject to tax. The cost of home-to-work travel is generally private expenditure as it is incurred so an employee can get to work. As this expenditure is usually private, if the employer provides the employee’s travel from home to work, the starting point is that it is taxable. However, some travel from home to work is not taxable because the expenditure relates to travel that is “on work”. This means not all employer-provided travel from an employee’s home to work is taxable, and an employer who provides travel from home to a distant workplace must consider whether that travel is subject to tax. If the employee is provided with an allowance or is reimbursed in relation to the cost of the travel, then the employer may have to deduct and pay PAYE in relation to that payment.  The operational statement considers the question of whether home-towork travel is taxable and is discussed in detail at ¶10-710. Law: IT07 ss CW 17, CW 18  ¶3-446 Relocation payments An amount an employer pays to, or on behalf of, an employee for expenses an employee incurs in connection with a “work-related relocation” is exempt income to the employee. Work-related relocation defined Not all relocation allowances are tax-exempt. To fall within the scope of this provision the relocation must be work-related. Section CW 17B(4) defines what is meant by “work-related relocation”. Relocation payments are exempt for an employee if: ▪ the employee’s relocation is to: □ take up employment with a new employer □ take up new duties at a new location with their existing employer, or □ continue in their current position, but at a new location, and ▪ the employee’s existing home is not within reasonable daily travelling distance of the new workplace (unless accommodation is provided as an integral part of the job), and ▪ the expense is on the list of eligible relocation expenses, and ▪ the payment reflects the actual expenditure incurred, and ▪ the expenditure is incurred before the end of the tax year following the year the employee relocates. Reasonable distance requirement A requirement is that the relocation of the employee’s residence must be necessary to carry out the job. The specific test set out in s CW  17B(4) is that the employee’s existing residence must not be within reasonable daily travelling distance of the new workplace. Section CW 17B(5) provides an exemption from the distance test when a person’s accommodation forms an integral part of his or her work. Some guidance as to what is meant by “reasonable travelling distance” is provided in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 9, December 2009 at 6. Actual expenditure Section CW 17B(2) contains a limitation on the amount which can be claimed under the exemption. The amount paid must be no more than the actual eligible relocation expenses incurred. To be an eligible expense, it must be one of those listed in a determination issued by the Commissioner. Eligible relocation expenses Determination DET 09/04, “Eligible Relocation Expenses”, sets out the types of expenses that may be treated as exempt income when an employee is reimbursed, or the expenditure is paid on an employee’s behalf, when an employee (including their immediate family) relocates their accommodation for employment purposes. “Immediate family” includes the employee’s partner, dependent children and any dependent adults that are part of the employee’s household. A dependent adult might be a dependent parent of the employee or partner or a disabled relative for whom the employee or the employee’s partner is the caregiver. The costs should be reasonable in the circumstances and, where relevant, should be as if they had been calculated on an arms-length basis between third parties. Where there is a time limit specified on an item, that limit will be assumed to have been met for payments made prior to the issue of the determination. Examples of the types of expenditure that appear in Determination DET 09/04 include: Preparatory  ▪ Obtaining immigration assistance. ▪ Immigration and emigration applications. ▪ Health checks, tests and immunisations necessary for immigration or emigration. ▪ Any documentation and police and other agency checks required as a result of the relocation. Transportation ▪ Removal and transport of household effects (including insurance, insurance excesses and taxes). ▪ Moving “tools of trade” (including insurance, insurance excesses and taxes). ▪ Moving other personal items such as cars, boats or trailers (including insurance, insurance excesses and taxes). ▪ Transport to get to the new location (such as, but not limited to, air fares and car rental costs) using a direct route, and meals and accommodation en route. Property ▪ Exiting or breaking existing accommodation leases and similar contracts. ▪ Selling an existing home and acquiring a new dwelling: □ real estate commissions □ advertising and auctioning □ legal and conveyancing fees and disbursements □ loan application fees □ mortgage early repayment loan application fees  □ valuation costs □ LIM and building reports (or similar) □ any stamp duty, and □ penalty interest charges for breaking a fixed term loan. (But not any loss in capital value of the existing home.) ▪ Hiring household and/or personal effects for the new location, while awaiting transportation of related property to the new location. ▪ Storage of household or personal effects left at the old location, for (subject to the overall time limit) up to two years. ▪ Accommodation or value of employer provided accommodation once the employee has arrived in the new location, for up to three months after arrival. Time limit Relocation expenditure incurred must be claimed no later than the end of the year following the tax year in which the employee relocated: see s CW 17B(3). Example: Gwen was promoted and her new post is located in Christchurch. She relocated from Auckland to Christchurch in November 2013. Her employer paid the costs of her workrelated relocation over a period of six months following her relocation. The expenses incurred may be claimed up to the end of the 2014–15 tax year.  Law: IT07 s CW 17B; TAA s 91AAR  ¶3-448 Overtime and work-related meal payments Overtime meal payments Amounts paid to an employee, or on behalf of an employee, for a meal when the employee is working overtime is exempt income to that  employee. This applies irrespective of whether the payment is made directly to the employee or on the employee’s behalf. For overtime meal allowances to be tax-exempt, all of the following criteria must be met: ▪ either the employee’s employment contract specifies that they are eligible for a payment for overtime hours worked, or an employer has a policy or practice of paying an overtime meal allowance, and ▪ the allowance reflects the actual expenditure incurred by the employee, or is a reasonable estimate of the expected costs likely to be incurred by the employee or group of employees, and ▪ the employee has worked at least two hours overtime on the day of the meal. The meaning of overtime is defined as the time worked for the employer on the day beyond the person’s ordinary hours set out in their employment contract. Work-related meals There are two exemptions from income tax in relation to “work-related meals”. The first exemption is for a period of up to three months and covers meal payments made to employees when the employee is required to work away from their employment base. It also covers food and drink consumed when the employee’s duties require them to travel. The three-month time period runs from the date the employee starts working away from their normal workplace and extends for as long as the employee works continuously at that location. If an employee does not have a fixed workplace, the three-month time period commences on the date they arrive at their accommodation base. Example 1: George is a retail assistant for a large company that has branches in Auckland and Wellington. As part of his employment duties, he is required to travel to the Wellington branch for a period of four months due to a shortage of staff. The company reimburses George for meal expenditure that he incurs while in Wellington. The meal reimbursement  payments will be tax free to George for the first three months and taxable for the last month.  Example 2: Ronald is an electrician who is sent by his Auckland employer to Taupo to complete a number of jobs in Taupo and the neighbouring towns. The work will take four months. Ronald rents accommodation in Taupo but also travels to Rotorua and Tokoroa to work at various sites. The three-month period for which the exemption applies will commence on the date that Ronald arrives in Taupo at his rented accommodation.  The three-month period includes the employee’s time away from the location on leave or other breaks for personal reasons, weekend breaks, required rest periods and other similar periods. The period of exemption can be extended if exceptional circumstances arise beyond the control of the employer and employee and require the employee to continue to work away from their normal workplace. However, the exemption only continues to apply for the period for which the employee is unable to return to their normal workplace because of the exceptional circumstances. The second exemption covers payments for working meals and light refreshments when the employee is required to be working away from their normal employment base for most of the day. This includes payments to cover meals consumed at conferences or training courses situated close to the employee’s normal work location. It does not include light refreshments if the employer would not normally provide such refreshments to the employee. Example 3: Melissa is a beauty therapist who works for a busy salon. Her employer sends her on a two-day course which will cover the latest developments on anti-aging treatments. Melissa pays for her meals while away on the course and is later reimbursed by her employer. The reimbursements will not be taxable to Melissa.  Example 4: Mark works in an office where tea and coffee is provided for employees while they are working. Mark is required to attend a local expo, where he staffs a stand promoting the  firm’s products. During his attendance at the expo, it is not practical for Mark’s employer to provide him with tea or coffee. A payment made by Mark’s employer to cover tea or coffee in these circumstances will not be taxable to Mark.  In both circumstances, when the exemption applies, the full amount of any meal payment is exempt. The exemption includes reimbursement payments and meal allowances. Neither exemption applies if the reimbursement is a substitute for salary or wages. Law: IT07 ss CW 17C, CW 17CB, CX 19(1)(c)  ¶3-449 Sustenance allowances Sustenance allowances are tax free for the employee, when the employer has an established policy or practice of paying sustenance allowances and: ▪ the employee works a minimum of seven hours on the day, and ▪ their employment requires them to: □ work outdoors and away from their employment base for most of the day, and □ undertake a long period of physical activity in travelling on foot or by bicycle, and ▪ it is not practicable for the employer to provide sufficient sustenance when the employee is working outdoors, and ▪ the allowance recognises: □ the demanding physical nature of the employee’s work, and □ that the employer would normally provide tea, coffee, water, or similar refreshments at the employment base in the course of their business. The exemption above was introduced primarily for the benefit of postal delivery workers who do not have the capacity to carry food and drinks with them due to carrying mail bags. These workers need to purchase  items along their mail route to ensure they maintain their energy levels while delivering mail. It was recognised that these employees do not have access to employer-provided drink facilities that are normally available to employee at little or no cost. Law: IT07 ss CW 17C(2), CX 19(1)(c)  OTHER EMPLOYEE PAYMENTS ¶3-450 Gift, tip or gratuity to employee A gift or tip made to an employee that relates to the employment or service of the person rather than to any personal relationship between the employee and the giver is normally treated as assessable income. Whether a payment is a gift is essentially a question of fact. While the payment is usually of a voluntary nature, it arises because services have been performed. To be classified as income, a tip or gratuity must be received by the taxpayer in recognition of employment or service provided. The sum paid need not come directly from an employer. If a gratuity is paid to an employee directly by a customer, or placed in a common pool for a group of employees, the amount received should be returned in the employee’s annual tax return. Where a gratuity is paid via a service charge added to the customer’s bill and later paid by the employer to the employee, the employer should treat this amount as wages and deduct PAYE at the appropriate rate. Payments or gifts made by way of personal esteem, even though of a recurring nature, are not income. Expenditure on gifts made to employees can be deductible to the donor. See Case U10 (1999) 19 NZTC 9,090 at 9,099. Fringe benefit tax may apply to gifts made to employees. See ¶21-425.  ¶3-455 Voluntary activities and honoraria General tax treatment  Generally, amounts derived by a person from voluntary activities are taxable income to that person, unless the amounts received are reimbursement payments for expenditure actually incurred by the volunteer. Volunteers defined Volunteers are defined as “people who freely undertake activity in New Zealand that has been chosen either by them or a group of which they are a member”. The activity must provide a benefit to a community or to another person. The voluntary activity must be done with no intention of private pecuniary gain on the part of the volunteer. However, the voluntary activity can be done for a business that has profit as an objective. Reimbursement payments Reimbursement payments to volunteers may be exempt income. For a reimbursement payment to be treated as tax-exempt the following provisions must be met: ▪ The payment must be based on actual expenditure incurred by the volunteer in undertaking the voluntary activity. ▪ Payments based on an estimate of the expenditure incurred will also be treated as exempt income, if the paying organisation has a process in place for making a reasonable estimate of the amount of expenditure likely to be incurred by volunteers for whom reimbursement is payable. Non-cash reimbursements such as petrol vouchers or meal vouchers still qualify for the exemption. Where a payment to a volunteer exceeds the actual cost incurred, the payer must treat the excess as an honorarium. An honorarium is a schedular payment from which tax must be deducted at the rate of 33% (see sch 4 pt B cl 1) (if the payee has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Paying organisations may make combined payments to volunteers on condition that they:  ▪ clearly identify which portion of the payment made to a volunteer is reimbursement ▪ correctly withhold tax from the honorarium portion, and ▪ return the honorarium as a schedular payment in their employment income information. Example: Miriama is a voluntary regional coordinator for a national sports organisation, SportCo. Some travel to local centres, as well as attendance at tournaments is involved. Miriama uses her own car. SportCo pays Miriama an honorarium of $50 per month for six months of the year. SportCo estimates that Miriama travels an average of 250 kilometres per month in the course of her voluntary activities, including her travel to and from her home. SportCo decides to reimburse Miriama’s travel expenses by paying her a travel allowance of 70 cents per kilometre. The honorarium and travel allowance are paid together. SportCo also gives Miriama meal vouchers to buy meals on the days that she has to attend tournaments. Miriama receives a total payment of $225 in each of the six months of the year. SportCo will deduct tax of $16.50 from the monthly payment of $225. The $50 honorarium is subject to withholding tax at the 0.33 rate, and the $50 is included as a schedular payment in the employer monthly schedule. SportCo will pay the $16.50 tax deduction to Inland Revenue. The $175 travel allowance is treated as exempt income. The meal vouchers fall within the scope of the exempt income treatment. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 119.  Local authorities The Commissioner treats elected members as self-employed. Their remuneration is in the form of honoraria subject to a 33% withholding tax under sch 4 pt B (if the payee has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Others When honoraria are paid to a person who is a true employee of the payer, they will be regarded as employment income under s CE 1 and will be subject to PAYE and the ACC earners’ levy. For honoraria paid to school trustees and Plunket members, see ¶3-457. Law: IT07 ss CO 1, CW 62B, sch 4 pt B  ¶3-457 Expenditure incurred in the derivation of a schedular payment The Commissioner may determine what amount or proportion of any particular schedular payment, or schedular payments of any specified class, shall be regarded as expenditure incurred in the derivation of the payment. A determination may be varied or revoked by the Commissioner at any time. The practical effect of the determination is an exemption from withholding tax for the amount determined. See s RD 8(3). Sporting event or competition prize money Prize money paid to a resident or non-resident entertainer (collectively referred to as an “entertainer”) at sporting events or competitions are generally subject to withholding tax at the rate of 20%. A determination in relation to these payments provides that when an entertainer receives prize money in relation to a sporting event or competition of any nature (specified activity), the sum of $500 shall be regarded as expenditure incurred in the production of the payment. However, if the total amount of the prize money is less than $500, the total amount of the prize money is regarded as expenditure incurred in the production of the payment. The determination applies to each separate prize paid to each separate entertainer for each separate event that the person has entered at the sporting event or competition. Example 1: Deborah and Jean compete as a pair in an aerobics competition. Deborah also competes in the women’s singles category. Deborah and Jean win first prize of $900 in the women’s pairs category. Deborah also wins first prize of $600 in the women’s singles category. The total prize amount for the women’s pairs category exceeds $500; however, the amount per person is under $500. Therefore, no withholding tax is required to be deducted from the $900 payment and Deborah and Jean both receive $450 each. With respect to the women’s singles prize of $600, withholding tax must be deducted from $100 (being the difference between the amount of the prize of $600 and the exemption amount of $500). This amounts to withholding tax of $20. Deborah receives the net amount of $580 ($600 − $20). Deborah has won total prize money of $1,050, but only $100 is subject to withholding tax. This is because the determination applies to each separate prize paid to each separate participant for each separate event.  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 9, No 5, May 1997 at 3. School trustees Honoraria paid to school trustees are generally subject to tax withheld at the rate of 33%. A related determination provides that when a trustee receives honoraria for attendance at a board meeting, the sum of $55 per member, or $75 for the chair, shall be regarded as expenditure incurred in the production of the payment. The maximum annual amount of the specified withholding payment must not exceed $605 per member, or $825 for the chair. However, if a trustee receives any reimbursement (in addition to honoraria) for expenditure incurred in attending that meeting, the exempted amount ($55, or $75 for the chair) shall be reduced by the amount of that additional reimbursement. Example 2: A member receives a payment of $90, made up of an honorarium of $70 and reimbursement for travel expenses of $20. The payer must deduct withholding tax from $35 (being honorarium of $70, reduced by the difference between the determined amount of $55 and the reimbursement payment of $20, ie $70 − ($55 − $20)).  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 7, July 2001 at 51–52. Royal New Zealand Plunket Trust Honoraria paid to members of the Royal New Zealand Plunket Trust (Plunket) are generally subject to withholding tax at the rate of 33%. Determination DET 18/02 provides that when a Plunket member receives honoraria as reimbursement of expenditure that member incurred in carrying out Plunket-related activities, that payment, up to a maximum of $800 pa, is regarded as expenditure incurred in the production of that payment. However, if the member receives any reimbursement (in addition to honoraria) for expenditure incurred, the exempted amount ($800) is reduced by the additional reimbursement. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 1, February 2019 at 55. Daily allowances paid in the screen production industry  Up to $80 per day of a daily (or per diem) allowance paid to contractors and entertainers working away from their town of normal residence in the screen production industry will be treated as expenditure incurred in the production of the schedular payment. Accordingly, no withholding tax is required to be deducted from this amount of the payment. To the extent that the contractor or entertainer is also provided with the goods and services for which the allowance is paid, either by the payer or another party acting on the payer’s behalf, the $80 exemption is reduced on a pro rata basis. The exemption applies to resident and non-resident contractors and resident and non-resident entertainers. The exemption will continue until the Commissioner varies or revokes the determination. The amount of daily allowance paid must be included in the employment income information as part of gross earnings and/or schedular payments, even if no withholding tax has been deducted. See Inland Revenue newsletter, Payroll News, Issue 56, September 2003. Law: IT07 s RD 8(3), sch 4 pts B, F  ¶3-460 Inducement payments An inducement payment can be made by an employer to encourage a particular person to either enter employment (a “golden hello”) or to remain in employment (a “golden handcuff”). These types of payments are generally subject to tax at source on the basis that they are employment income. Section CE 1(1)(g) includes as employment income “any other benefit in money”. This section can be regarded as a “catch-all” for any unusual or extraordinary receipts arising in connection with an employee’s employment. See, for example, C of IR v Kerslake (2001) 20 NZTC 17,158. Exit inducement payments Exit inducement payments are sometimes paid by a prospective employer to an employee to induce them to leave their existing position and accept a new position. As an inducement, the employee may be  compensated for giving up a vocation or for a change in status. The payments are usually made at the beginning of the employment relationship or, in some cases, even before the employment relationship commences. The payments may be non-refundable. Section CE 10 deems any amount derived by a person for loss of a vocation, position or status, or for leaving a position, to be income. The section is intended to be broad enough to cover not only employment positions but also contracts for services or an office such as a board membership. It is also intended to be wide enough to cover in-kind payments as well as monetary payments. However, s CE 10 is not intended to apply to payments genuinely made in respect of humiliation, loss of dignity or injury to feelings relating to employment disputes. See ¶3-468. Inducement payments to employees are subject to tax at source at the rate for extra pays. See ¶3-221. The ACC earner’s levy must also be deducted. Law: IT07 ss CE 1(1)(g), CE 10  ¶3-465 Restrictive covenants A restrictive covenant (also known as a restraint of trade agreement) can be an agreement stating that in the event of an employee’s employment being terminated, the employee agrees not to carry on business in competition with his or her former employer. In return for that agreement the employee is granted a payment. A restraint of trade agreement can take many forms, including agreements: ▪ not to approach the former employer’s clients ▪ not to compete with the former employer within a certain timeframe or geographical area ▪ not to use confidential knowledge regarding trade practice or processes obtained while working for a former employer.  Restrictive covenant payments paid to employees are income and subject to tax at the rate for extra pays. See ¶3-221. The ACC earner’s levy must also be deducted. See further at ¶5-297. Law: IT07 s CE 9  ¶3-467 Superannuation payment An employee who terminates his or her employment will often receive a pay-out from the employer’s superannuation scheme. The payment will not be taxable if the superannuation scheme is a superannuation fund as defined in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. See ¶29-400. Effectively, a superannuation fund is a complying trust, and distributions, other than beneficiary income, derived by a person in his or her capacity as beneficiary from any complying trust will be tax free. Distributions from schemes that are not “superannuation funds” are taxable in the hands of the beneficiary as a taxable, distribution from a non-complying trust. See ¶29-410.  ¶3-468 Damages and compensation under the Employment Relations Act or the Human Rights Act Payments ordered by a court or authority to be made to a former employee to cover loss of wages or allowances are taxable to the recipient. PAYE must be deducted from such payments. See ¶3-050. Compensation payments under the Employment Relations Act 2000 Compensation payments made for humiliation, loss of dignity or injury to feelings are treated differently. Public binding ruling BR Pub 06/05 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 7, August 2006 at 9) confirms that: ▪ Payments that are genuinely and entirely for compensation for humiliation, loss of dignity or injury to feelings under s 123(c)(i) of the Employment Relations Act 2000 are not employment income (monetary remuneration). Consequently, such payments do not form part of the income of the employee under s CE 1 or under ordinary concepts of income (see s CA 1(2)).  ▪ Specifically excluded from the ruling are payments that, in reality, are for lost wages or other income but that are merely characterised by the parties as being for humiliation, loss of dignity or injury to feelings. This is irrespective of whether such an agreement is signed by a mediator under the Employment Relations Act. ▪ There is no liability under subpart RD for employers or former employers to deduct PAYE from these payments. The ruling applies for an indefinite period. The deductibility of damages and compensation payments is discussed at ¶10-212. Compensation payments under the Human Rights Act 1993 Public binding ruling BR Pub 05/12 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 6, August 2005 at 4) concerns payments for damages to a complainant or aggrieved person for humiliation, loss of dignity, and injury to feelings under s 92M(1)(c) of the Human Rights Act 1993 (for breaches of Pt 1A or Pt 2 of that Act awarded by the Human Rights Review Tribunal) or pursuant to an out-of-court settlement where the complaint involves an employer–employee relationship. The ruling provides that: ▪ payments for damages or out of court settlements that are genuinely and entirely awarded for humiliation, loss of dignity, and injury to feelings under s 92M(1)(c) of the Human Rights Act are not income under s CE 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (amounts derived in connection with employment), and ▪ such payments for damages are not income under ordinary concepts under s CA 1(2). Example: An ultimatum to an employee that he work at a lower grading or be dismissed resulted in the Employment Court finding that he had suffered a personal grievance. Tax consequences led to the taxpayer contending before the Taxation Review Authority that part of the payment awarded to him by the Employment Court was not assessable income. The Authority found, however, that the payment was for a combination of loss of  wages and benefits relating to the taxpayer’s employment and was assessable as employment income (monetary remuneration). See Case U39 (2000) 19 NZTC 9,369. The Authority’s decision was affirmed by the High Court. See Cleland v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,086.  This ruling applies for an indefinite period.  ¶3-470 Taxation of employee share schemes New core rules for determining the amount and time of derivation of income and incurring of expenditure under an employee share scheme were introduced with effect from 29 September 2018. The objective of the provisions is neutral tax treatment of employee share scheme benefits. That is, to the extent possible, the tax position of both the employer and the employee should be the same whether remuneration for labour is paid in cash or shares. Generally, these rules apply to benefits where the taxing point occurs on or after 29 September 2018. For a discussion of the taxation of benefits from employee share schemes before 29 September 2018, see CCH, 2019 New Zealand Master Tax Guide, ¶3-469. Definition of employee share scheme The rules apply to benefits provided under employee share schemes. An “employee share scheme” is an arrangement with a purpose or effect of issuing or transferring shares in a company to a person who will be, is, or has been an employee (or shareholder-employee) of that company or of another company in the same group. It also includes the provision of shares to an associate of the employee or shareholderemployee. In all cases, the arrangement must be connected with the person’s employment or service. The use of the term “arrangement” covers all aspects of a scheme, for example, direct transfers of shares, loans to buy shares, bonuses, put and call options and transfers to trusts, etc. The definition also covers past, present and future employees, and includes shareholderemployees. However, an employee share scheme does not include an arrangement that requires an employee, shareholder-employee or associate to:  ▪ pay market value for the shares on the “share scheme taxing date” (described in more detail below, but generally the date on which the employee holds the shares like any other shareholder), or ▪ put at risk shares they acquired for market value consideration, where the scheme provides no protection to the person against a fall in the value of the shares and none of the consideration for acquiring the shares is provided to the person under an agreement it is used for acquiring the shares. “Market value” is defined for these purposes as: ▪ for a share or option quoted on an exchange— □ means an amount equal to the middle market quotation at the time for a similar share or option, unless the quotation is not a fair reflection of the market value having regard to certain features of the exchange, and □ includes an amount equal to the 5-day volume weighted average price or any other method that is accepted by the Commissioner or is comparable to the 5-day volume weighted average price, for such shares or options ▪ for a share or option not quoted on an exchange, means the amount that a willing purchaser would pay to acquire the share or option in an arm’s length acquisition and is determined using a method that— □ confirms with commercially acceptable practice □ may have regard to the present value of the company’s anticipated income or cash flows and the realisable value of the company’s assets, and □ results in a valuation that is fair and reasonable. The definition of “employee share scheme” also excludes an “exempt ESS” (see ¶3-471).  Example 1: Jim is employed by ABC Co, a closely-held company. As part of his employment agreement, after he has worked for the company for three years, if the company’s other shareholders are happy with his performance, they will let him buy 25% of the company’s shares for their current market value at that time. While this is an arrangement with a purpose or effect of issuing or transferring shares in a company to a person who will be, is, or has been an employee (or shareholderemployee), market value will be paid for the shares on the share scheme taxing date. Accordingly, this arrangement is not an employee share scheme for the purposes of the new definition.  Example 2: Casey, Hamish and Steve get together and incorporate a company to develop some technology-related intellectual property (IP). They are each employed by the company. When the shares are issued they are worth virtually nothing (on a balance sheet basis) and a nominal subscription price of $0.01 is paid by each shareholder-employee. The shareholders’ agreement states that to ensure they commit to developing the IP over three years, if they leave within three years they forfeit their shares. While this is an arrangement with a purpose or effect of issuing or transferring shares in a company to a person who will be, is, or has been an employee (or shareholderemployee), market value was paid for the shares, not using money provided to the employees for that purpose, and the employees have then chosen to put the shares at risk. Accordingly, this arrangement is not an employee share scheme for the purposes of the new definition. Examples taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 53–54.  Timing of employees’ income — share scheme taxing date The time when the employee is taxable is defined as the “share scheme taxing date”: see s CE 7B. Unless an employee first transfers its share scheme benefits to a non-associate, or the company cancels them, the share scheme taxing date will be the first date when: ▪ there is no material risk that beneficial ownership of the shares will change, or that the shares will be required to be transferred or cancelled ▪ the employee is not entitled to be compensated for a fall in the value of the shares, and  ▪ there is no material risk there will be a change in the terms of the shares affecting their value. If the benefits are cancelled or transferred to a non-associate before these events occur, then the share scheme taxing date is at the time of the cancellation or transfer. In determining whether there is a risk of a change of ownership, transfer or cancellation, certain rights and requirements do not affect the employee’s status as the economic owner of the shares under the scheme and are ignored. They are rights or requirements: ▪ for transfer for market value ▪ not contemplated by the employee share scheme ▪ that have no material risk of occurring or are of no material commercial significance, or ▪ that also apply to shares not under the employee share scheme. A number of examples can be found in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 57–62 that illustrate how these rules work in practice for some common types of employee share schemes, including: Example 3: Simple vesting period Facts A Co transfers shares worth $10,000 to a trustee on trust for an employee. If the employee leaves the company for any reason during the next three years, the shares are forfeited for no consideration. After three years, the shares are transferred to the employee. Result The share scheme taxing date is when the three years is up and the employee is still employed. Analysis The risk of loss of the shares for the first three years means there is a material risk that the beneficial ownership of the share will change under the terms of the scheme. None of the exceptions apply.  Example 4: Loan funded scheme A Facts B Co provides an employee with an interest-free full recourse loan of $10,000 to acquire shares in B Co for market value, on the basis that: ▪ the shares are held by a trustee for three years ▪ dividends are paid to the employee from the time the shares are acquired ▪ if the employee leaves within three years, the shares must be sold back to the trustee for $10,000, which must be used to repay the loan ▪ if the employee is still employed by B Co after three years, the employee can either sell the shares to the trustee for the loan amount, or choose to continue in the scheme, and ▪ if the employee chooses to continue, the loan is only repayable when the shares are sold. Result The share scheme taxing date will be the earlier of when the employee leaves employment, or the expiry of the three years. Analysis Until the three years are up, if the employee leaves B Co for whatever reason, they lose their beneficial ownership of the shares for an amount that is not their market value. So the share scheme taxing date will, on the face of it, be the end of that three-year period. If the employee leaves within that period and is therefore required to transfer their rights, the sale price will be taxed, but since the sale price is the same as the amount contributed, there will be no gain or loss. Once the three-year period is up, the employee will either have no employee share scheme income (if they sell the shares back to the trustee for $10,000) or will pay tax on the difference between the value of the shares at that time and their $10,000 price (if they choose to keep the shares).  Amount of income to employee The amount of income to the employee is the value of the shares at the share scheme taxing date (or the transfer price if transferred to a nonassociate, or the amount paid for cancellation, if cancelled by the employer) less the amount paid for them. Even where benefits are conferred on, or transferred to, an associate of an employee, it is the employee who is taxed on the income. If the amount paid exceeds the value of the shares, the difference is deductible to the employee (ss CE 2(3) and DV 27(3)). Apportionment for overseas service  The rules contain an income apportionment formula. The formula applies to all employees. It excludes from taxable income employee share scheme benefits that accrue while a person is neither New Zealand resident nor deriving New Zealand source income. The extent of such accrual is determined by first establishing the entire period over which the benefit accrues, and then determining the proportion of that period during which the person is non-resident and not deriving New Zealand source income from their employment. The period of accrual ends once the rights vest, rather than when the income arises. So, for example, in the case of an option, the period of accrual will end once the options are exercisable rather than when they are actually exercised. The employee share scheme income is treated as non-residents’ foreign source income (which is not taxable income) to the extent of this proportion. Transfers to associates Transfers to associates are ignored for the purposes of calculating the employee’s share scheme income. Rollover relief for transfer to new scheme If a person’s employee share scheme rights are cancelled and replaced with rights in a different scheme, the value of the replacement rights are not included in the person’s income arising due to the cancellation of the original scheme: ss CE 2(2)(c) and CE 7D. The benefit provided by the replacement scheme is taxed appropriately by applying the rules to that scheme. Timing and amount of employers’ deduction An employer is denied a deduction for provision of employee share scheme benefits, except for: ▪ Costs incurred in establishing or managing the scheme. These costs include legal and accounting fees incurred in setting up the scheme, as well as ongoing management fees. Deductibility of these costs are left to the usual tests, eg the capital/revenue test. Costs incurred by an employee share scheme trust are treated as  incurred by the employer or issuing company, as a result of s CE 6 treating an employee share scheme trust as a nominee. ▪ An amount equal to the employee’s income, which is treated as a cost incurred at the same time as the employee recognises the income. Deductibility of this cost depends on meeting the usual tests. ▪ Amounts that are taxable to the employee as employment income other than as employee share scheme benefits. This is intended to preserve a deduction for the cost of paying a bonus where the payment of the bonus is part of the terms of an employee share scheme. Accordingly: ▪ payments to fund an employee share scheme trust to acquire shares, or to reimburse a parent for providing shares, are not deductible, and ▪ as a practical matter, employers will need to either prohibit employees from transferring their rights to a non-associate before the share scheme taxing date or place a requirement on employees to inform them of the time and amount paid in such a transfer, in order to correctly calculate their deduction. To prevent double deductions, when shares are provided to an employee and a deduction has been taken for that provision other than in accordance with s DV 27, the deduction under s DV 27 is reduced by the earlier deduction. Effect on available subscribed capital The rules seek to tax any benefit conferred on an employee by the issue of shares in an employee share scheme in the same way as an equivalent cash payment followed by an acquisition of shares in the issuing company. Consistent with this principle, the rules provide for an increase in the employer’s available subscribed capital (ASC) by the amount deemed to be paid (plus actually paid) for the shares. The rules also cater for the situation where the employer is not the company issuing the shares.  The amount of the deduction to the employer gives rise to additional ASC for both the employer and, if the shares issued are in the parent of the employer, the parent. In the latter case, any reimbursement paid to the parent reduces the subsidiary’s ASC but does not increase the parent’s ASC. If the employer has income from the issue of the shares, that reduces its ASC. Example 5: Facts Employer Co issues 700 shares worth $3 each to an employee for $2 per share (that is, at a $1 per share discount). The scheme taxing date is the date of issue. The employee has $700 income and Employer Co has a $700 deduction. ASC Result Employer Co’s ASC increases by $2,100, being the total of the $1,400 received for the provision of the shares and its $700 expenditure incurred for providing the shares. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 66.  The rules also ensure that the acquisition of shares as part of an employee share scheme is able to be treated as an acquisition of treasury stock, regardless of whether the shares are acquired by the company itself and not cancelled, or are acquired by a trustee who is treated as a nominee of the company, provided the shares are allocated to an employee within a year of acquisition. This is then entirely disregarded for ASC purposes and no adjustments are necessary. Example 6: Facts An employee share scheme trust for Employer Co acquires 700 Employer Co shares on market for $2.50 per share. Six months later, when they are worth $3 per share, it allocates them to an employee for $2 per share. The purchase price is funded by a loan from Employer Co. If the employee is still employed by Employer Co after one year, the employee will receive a $1,400 bonus from Employer Co (grossed-up for PAYE), which must be used to repay the loan. Otherwise, the employee must return the shares to the employer in full repayment of the loan at the time she leaves employment. After one year, the shares are worth $5 each. ASC result for Employer Co  The trustee’s acquisition of the shares is treated as an on-market acquisition of treasury stock by Employer Co. Because the shares are allocated to an employee within 12 months of acquisition, the acquisition is not treated as reverting to an on-market cancellation under section CD 25(2). Therefore the amount paid to acquire the shares does not reduce Employer Co’s ASC and the $1,400 paid by the employee to acquire the shares does not increase Employer Co’s ASC. If the employee does not stay for 12 months, Employer Co will be treated as acquiring the shares at that time for $2.50 per share, the amount for which they were initially acquired on market. This acquisition will not reduce Parent Co’s ASC if the shares are allocated to another employee within 12 months. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 70.  In addition, a company that issues shares to an employee (or trustee on their behalf) for market value can also elect not to apply the provisions and therefore no adjustments are necessary for ASC purposes. Example 7: Facts B Co provides an employee with an interest-free full recourse loan of $10,000 to acquire newly issued shares in B Co for market value, on the basis that: ▪ the shares are held by a trustee for three years ▪ dividends are paid to the employee from the time the shares are acquired ▪ if the employee leaves within three years, the shares must be sold back to the trustee for $10,000, which must be used to repay the loan ▪ if the employee is still employed by B Co after three years, the employee can either sell the shares to the trustee for the loan amount, or choose to continue in the scheme, and ▪ if the employee chooses to continue, the loan is only repayable when the shares are sold. The employee remains employed for three years, and chooses to continue in the scheme, as the shares are worth $18,000 at that time. Result B Co’s ASC will increase by $10,000 when it issues the shares. Prima facie it will also increase by $8,000 at the end of year 3, unless the company elects to the contrary. Analysis The $10,000 received by B Co is ASC under s CD 43(2), because it is within the definition of “subscriptions”. The $8,000 is also included in “subscriptions” under section  CD 43(6E). However, B Co can elect out of section CD 43(6E), because it issued the shares for their market value (section CD 43(6F). Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 70.  Employer may account for tax on benefit An employer who has established an employee share scheme for a class of employees (or former employees) may elect to withhold and pay an amount on account of income tax payable on shares an employee acquires under the scheme. The benefit the employee receives then becomes part of his or her salary or wages for the relevant pay period, being treated as an extra pay. The objective of this treatment is to simplify an employee’s year-end tax process. The election is made by the employer calculating the amount of tax payable on the employee share benefit and accounting for it to Inland Revenue. The amount must also be reported in the employer’s employment income information (see below). From 26 June 2019, employers can make an irrevocable election to withhold tax on employee share scheme benefits to allow the use of equity-settled accounting treatment under financial reporting standards (s RD 7B(1)(a)). See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 85. Reporting by employer A new PAYE reporting environment applies from 1 April 2019 (see ¶3023). Section 23K of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) specifically provides for the reporting of employee share scheme benefit information by employers. The recognition of benefits derived by an employee under an employee share scheme is deferred to the 20th day after the share scheme taxing date for the employee (the ESS deferral date) in order to provide all employers with sufficient time to compile information to support the required disclosures and deduction of tax, if it is to be withheld. Employers may provide the employment income information in relation to the employee share scheme benefits: ▪ under the rules for the payday filing of information (see discussion in ¶3-023), with the ESS deferral date treated as the payday, or  ▪ twice-monthly, where for any benefit received where the ESS deferral date falls between the 1st and 15th of the month the benefit must be reported, at the latest, as if the benefit was received on the 15th, and where the ESS deferral date falls between the 16th and month end the benefit must be reported, at the latest, as if it was received at month end. Employers are not required to provide IR with information on: ▪ employee share scheme benefits received by former employees if they have not chosen to withhold tax from the benefit, or ▪ benefits arising under tax-exempt, widely-offered employee share schemes. The particulars to be provided are specified in sch 4, table 1 of the TAA (see ¶3-023). Example 8: Under the new rules, if an employee received a benefit under an employee share scheme on 5 July 2019 (that is, the share scheme taxing date for the employee share scheme beneficiary is 5 July 2019) they would be treated as deriving income in relation to the benefit on 25 July 2019. Their employer would have two options as to how they meet their obligation to provide information in relation to the benefit to Inland Revenue: ▪ Option 1: reporting on a payday basis If their employer chooses to report information in relation to the benefit on a payday basis, 25 July 2019 would also be the relevant payday. This would mean that their employer would be required to report information about the value of the benefit received by the employee and any tax withheld in relation to the benefit by the 2nd working day after 25 July 2019 if they are an employer in the online group, or by the 10th working day after 25 July 2019 if they are an employer in the nonelectronic group (or an employer in the new group who provides their employment income information on paper). ▪ Option 2: reporting on a twice-monthly basis If their employer chooses to report information in relation to the benefit on a twicemonthly basis, 25 July 2019 would be treated as the “relevant day” for the purposes of new section 23C(4) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This would mean that their employer would be required to report information about the value of the benefit received by the employee and any tax withheld in relation to the benefit by the 2nd working day after 31 July 2019 if they are an employer in the online group, or by the 10th working day after 31 July 2019 if they are an employer in the  non-electronic group (or an employer in the new group who provides their employment income information on paper). 25 July 2019 would also be the relevant date for determining the due date for the payment of tax withheld in relation to the benefit (assuming that the employer elected to withhold tax in relation to the benefit). In this example, the due date for paying the tax withheld to Inland Revenue would be 5 August 2019 if the employer was above the $500,000 per annum of PAYE and ESCT threshold, or 20 August 2019 if they are below the threshold. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 15.  Anti-avoidance provision Section GB 49B allows the Commissioner to counteract any tax advantage gained from an arrangement that attempts to circumvent the intent and application of the share scheme taxing date by seeking to have shares taxed either earlier or later than is consistent with that intent. Transitional rules Transitional rules were provided for previously existing schemes to ensure taxpayers had sufficient time to amend schemes (if necessary) to take account of the new law following enactment of the relevant Bill on 29 March 2018. Benefits could continue to be taxed under the old law in specific circumstances for a six-month period, ie up to 29 September 2018. Section CZ 1 provides that the new employee share scheme rules do not apply to shares granted or acquired before the publication of the officials’ issues paper on 12 May 2016. The new rules also do not apply to a particular share if: ▪ that share was granted or acquired before 29 September 2018 ▪ the shares were not granted with a purpose of avoiding the application of the new law, and ▪ the share scheme taxing date under the new law is before 1 April 2022. If shares benefits are taxed under both the previous and new rules, the new rules provide the employee with a credit for income recognised under the old rules.  Employer-issued cryptoassets In August 2019, Inland Revenue released a fourth public ruling in the cryptoassets series : BR Pub 19/04, “Income tax – application of the employee share scheme rules to employer issued crypto-assets provided to an employee” (see also BR Pub 21/01 and BR Pub 21/02, which replaced BR Pub 19/01 and BR Pub 19/02, at ¶3-198, and BR Pub 19/03 at ¶21-436). BR Pub 19/04 considers the income tax treatment of employer-issued cryptoassets provided to employees, where the cryptoasset issued is a share in the employer (ie provides an interest in the capital of the company), the employee is not required to pay market value for the cryptoasset and the cryptoasset is not provided under an exempt ESS. The ruling is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 51. The ruling concludes that the provision of the cryptoassets by the employer (or other group company) to the employee in the above circumstances is an employee share scheme and the employee share scheme rules will apply. The value of the taxable benefit received by the employee will be determined under s CE 2 and the amount of that benefit will be the employee’s employment income. The ruling applies to certain types of cryptoassets (commonly referred to as “equity” tokens) that provide ownership interests in entities. However, note that in relation to determining whether a cryptoasset is a share, the ruling states: “38. Crypto-assets that provide an interest in the capital of a company, such as the right to receive a share in the surplus assets on a winding up of the company and potentially other distributions from the company, will be a ‘share’ for income tax purposes. To qualify as a share, the interests need to be by way of an equity interest in the company’s performance, and not simply a debt or other contractual right to receive payments. For completeness, the relevant interest must be in a company, so this would not include any interests in a decentralised autonomous organisation that operates over the blockchain, nor would it include a token that only provides interests in a platform. 39. Given that this will be highly fact specific and will depend on the terms of each particular crypto-asset issued, this Ruling does  not rule on when a crypto-asset will be a ‘share’. To determine whether a crypto-asset is a ‘share’ it will be necessary to carefully consider the terms and conditions on which the crypto-asset is issued. This commentary can be used as guidance.” Note also that cryptoassets that are a “share” for tax purposes may not necessarily be a “share” for the purposes of the Companies Act 1993 or an “equity security” under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013. The ruling contains two examples that explain the application of the law: Example 9: Crypto-assets that provide interests in a platform DigitalKeyChain Ltd, a New Zealand incorporated limited liability company, is developing a new blockchain-based platform for property sales. DigitalKeyChain Ltd issues its own crypto-asset, D-KEYs, by way of an ICO. DigitalKeyChain Ltd employs five full-time employees. As DigitalKeyChain Ltd is unable to pay competitive rates, it proposes to provide each of the full-time employees with DKEYs issued in the ICO to the value of NZ$5,000. The D-KEY whitepaper provides that a certain number of D-KEYs are required for users to access the platform and provides holders with voting rights over the operation of the platform. The D-KEYs are not “shares” as they do not provide an interest in the capital of DigitalKeyChain Ltd. Accordingly, the employee share scheme rules do not apply. However, other employment income rules are likely to apply to the benefit received by the employees (as set out in BR PUB 19/03: Income Tax — employer issued cryptoassets provided to an employee).  Example 10: Crypto-assets that provide rights on a wind-up Assume that, in addition to the facts set out above, the whitepaper and relevant terms and conditions of issue provide that D-KEY holders will receive (at the discretion of the directors) a right to distributions of DigitalKeyChain Ltd’s profits. The whitepaper and relevant terms and conditions also provide D-KEY holders with a right to a share in surplus assets on a liquidation of DigitalKeyChain Ltd after all creditors have been paid. In these circumstances, the D-KEYs are “shares” under s YA 1. The employee share scheme rules will apply to the D-KEYs issued to the five employees. The employees did not pay anything for the receipt of the D-Keys, so the full market value will be employment income.  Law: IT07 ss CE 1(1)(d), CE 2, CE 6–CE 7D, CV 20, CZ 1, DV 27, GB 49B, RD 7(1)(bb), RD 7B, RD 22(3), (4), YA 1; TAA s 23K  ¶3-471 Exempt employee share schemes (exempt ESS) The Income Tax Act 2007 previously provided a concessionary regime to encourage employers to offer shares to employees under certain widely-offered “share purchase schemes” (commonly known as “exempt schemes”). Those rules were out of date, complex and no longer fit for purpose. New simplified rules have been introduced that: ▪ modernise and simplify the criteria for these schemes, including removing the employers’ 10% notional interest deduction ▪ increase the monetary threshold for the schemes (which has not been increased since 1980), and ▪ address the current ability for employers to claim unintended deductions for the cost of providing the exempt share benefit to employees. The new rules simplify and clarify the legislation relating to exempt employee share schemes (“exempt ESS”), while retaining many of the key features of the original schemes and their tax treatment. Shares provided to employees under schemes that meet certain criteria are exempt income to the employees. Benefits provided under schemes that qualified for the previous tax-exempt treatment simply continue to qualify under the new legislation, but such schemes are entitled to provide the same level of exempt benefit as new schemes. For all exempt ESS, employers are explicitly denied a deduction for the cost of providing the shares (other than costs relating to establishing and managing the scheme). The previous 10% notional interest deduction is repealed. The changes apply from 29 March 2018, and from 6 April 2017 (the date of introduction of the relevant Bill) if shares under the exempt ESS were acquired on or after that date in other than the ordinary course of the exempt ESS.  The automatic exemption from fringe benefit tax for loans provided under ESS in s CX 10(2) continues. The new rules have been designed to ensure existing schemes that meet the criteria described below can continue to operate without unnecessary disruption. Therefore, to the extent possible, the existing rules have been retained and simply clarified. For a scheme to be an exempt ESS, all the following criteria must be met (s CW 26C): ▪ The cost to employees of shares made available for purchase must not exceed their market value at the date of purchase but may be less. ▪ The maximum value of shares provided under an exempt ESS is $5,000 pa. ▪ The maximum discount an employer can provide to an employee is $2,000 pa. This means that the most an employee will be able to spend buying shares per annum is $3,000 ($3,000 plus the $2,000 discount means a maximum value of $5,000 worth of shares). This will equate to a maximum cost of $9,000 over three years. ▪ 90% or more of full-time permanent employees who are not subject to securities law of other jurisdictions must be eligible to participate in the scheme. If the scheme applies to part-time employees or to seasonal employees, the same threshold applies. Previously, all full-time employees had to be eligible to participate. ▪ If the scheme has a minimum spend requirement, the amount can be no more than $1,000 pa. ▪ Any minimum period of service that may be required before an employee becomes eligible to participate must not exceed three years (or the equivalent of three years full-time service). ▪ If a trust holds shares in trust for an employee, the arrangement must provide that the trustee pays dividends directly to the employee and the dividends are treated as derived by the employee.  ▪ If the employee is required to pay any amount for the shares, then the employer must provide a loan for that amount or allow the employee to pay for or buy the shares in regular instalments. ▪ Loans to employees for the purchase of shares must be free of all interest and other charges. ▪ Employees will repay loans by regular equal instalments at intervals of not more than one month over a period between three and five years from the date of the loan. ▪ Generally speaking, the shares have to be held (either by the employee or by a trustee of a trust on behalf of the employee) for the longer of three years and when the loan is repaid — this is to ensure that the scheme is really an exempt ESS, and not a mechanism for providing cash remuneration. However, the employee is not required to hold the shares beyond the date their employment ends. If the employee has paid full market value for the shares, then they only have to hold them until they have fully repaid the loan — at this point they are like any other shareholder and should not have extra restrictions placed on them. ▪ The employee can choose to withdraw from the scheme by giving the employer one month’s notice and have their shares purchased back for the lesser of market value and cost. ▪ If participation in the scheme is causing serious hardship for the employee, the terms of payment can be varied or employees can be allowed to withdraw from the scheme and receive the market value of their shares. ▪ If the employee leaves employment before the three years is up, then: □ if they leave because of death, accident, sickness, redundancy or retirement at normal retiring age they can keep the shares (subject to repayment of the loan) or have the shares bought back for the lesser of market value and cost, and  □ if they leave for any other reason (so-called “bad leavers”), the company may choose whether they are permitted to keep their shares, or whether the shares are bought back at the lesser of cost and market value. ▪ The exempt ESS is not required to be approved by the Commissioner. However, the Commissioner must be notified of the scheme’s existence and the employer must advise the Commissioner annually of the grants made under the scheme (see s 63B of the Tax Administration Act 1994). ▪ There is no requirement for a scheme to have a trust — many schemes have trusts as a matter of convenience. Removing this requirement provides greater flexibility (especially for small employers who may not want the administrative expense of operating a trust for a fairly small scheme). ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to clarify that the trustee of an exempt ESS can be treated as a nominee of the company providing a scheme (as is already the case for an ESS other than an exempt ESS). As there is no policy reason for the difference in the tax treatment of a trustee administering a scheme on a company’s behalf, the proposed amendment to s CE 6 will extend nominee treatment to trustees of exempt ESS with effect from the date of enactment of the Bill. Law: IT07 ss CW 26B–CW 26G, DV 28, YA 1; TAA s 63B  ¶3-472 Proposals for employee share schemes for start-up companies In May 2017, the Government released an issues paper, “Taxation of employee share schemes: start-up companies”. This paper expands on a proposal raised in the May 2016 issues paper to defer the taxation point of employee share scheme (ESS) benefits for employees of startup companies, with a corresponding deferral of the company’s deduction. This proposal was not included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2017–18, Employment and Investment Income, and  Remedial Matters) Act 2018, as the Government wanted to undertake further consultation. The changes made by the Act (see ¶3-470) generally tax ESS benefits at the same time or later than they are currently taxed. Nevertheless, some submitters had previously commented that taxing share benefits is problematic where the employee cannot sell the shares at the taxing point. This is for two reasons. First, it might be difficult to find the cash to pay the tax. Second, valuation might be problematic. Both of these issues are likely to be at their most pressing for early stage or start-up companies. That is the basis for the deferral proposal for start-up companies. The issues paper provided more detail on the possible deferral regime and sought submissions on a number of issues to determine whether a fair deferral regime can be developed. The approach taken in the paper is not intended to provide a tax concession. The “cost” of deferring the taxing point is that employees will, in effect, be taxable on any gains on the shares until the deferral taxing point occurs. Of course, where the shares decline in value, this will result in less tax for the employee.  PAYE INTERMEDIARIES ¶3-474 Background to PAYE intermediaries A person meeting certain requirements may apply to the Commissioner to be accredited as a PAYE intermediary. This person can enter into an arrangement with an employer to assume the employer’s responsibility to pay PAYE and employer’s superannuation contribution tax deductions to Inland Revenue. Until 1 April 2020, a government subsidy was available to help small employers meet the cost of engaging a payroll intermediary. To obtain the subsidy the small employer had to engage a listed PAYE intermediary. The subsidy was then paid to the intermediary. The subsidy was introduced to encourage small employers to use payroll agents to manage their payroll obligations.  ¶3-475 Approval and revocation of PAYE intermediaries  An employer can enter into an arrangement with a person to transfer the employer’s PAYE and employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) obligations to that person. That person (a PAYE intermediary) will be responsible for making the required payments and tax deductions and filing the relevant returns under the PAYE and ESCT rules on behalf of the employer. Approval A person who meets the requirements set out in s 124K of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) may apply to the Commissioner for approval to become a PAYE intermediary. An application to become a PAYE intermediary must be made to the Commissioner by giving notice that: ▪ a trust account has been established and will be operated as required under the PAYE intermediary provisions (see below) ▪ the applicant will comply with the PAYE and ESCT rules (if the employer’s obligations under these rules are taken over by the applicant) ▪ the required administration and information technology systems to protect the privacy of the personal information and payment details of employees have been established and will be maintained (see ¶3-479) ▪ the applicant, or each member of the applicant or each of the persons acting as a director, secretary or statutory officer of the applicant, and any principal, is not a discharged or undischarged bankrupt and has not been convicted of an offence involving fraud and is eligible to be a company director, and ▪ before acting as a PAYE intermediary, the applicant will inform the employer that the Commissioner does not guarantee payments by the applicant to employees of the employer and will provide the employer with a copy of the applicant’s notice to the Commissioner. An application may be made on form IR 910.  The Commissioner may: ▪ approve an applicant as a PAYE intermediary if he is satisfied that the applicant will comply with the PAYE and ESCT rules and the applicant’s information technology systems will allow it to make payments and file returns in the prescribed format ▪ specify a period for which a person is approved as a PAYE intermediary. A person must have entered agreements that have been approved by the Commissioner (see ¶3-477) with at least 10 employers to be a PAYE intermediary. Revocation The Commissioner may revoke the approval if any of the following occurs: ▪ the person fails to comply with the PAYE or the ESCT rules (where they have assumed the employers’ obligations for those rules) ▪ the person or a member of the person or a person acting as a director, secretary or statutory officer of the person or a principal no longer meets the “fitness” requirement under s 124K of the TAA, ie has been made bankrupt, has been convicted of an offence involving fraud or is not eligible to be a company director ▪ the person has been put into liquidation or receivership ▪ the person, if a company, ceases to be registered in New Zealand. If approval is revoked, the Commissioner must send a notice of revocation to the PAYE intermediary and any affected employer (being an employer who has notified the Commissioner that the PAYE intermediary is a PAYE intermediary for the employer). This notice must be given at least 14 days before the date the revocation takes effect. Any decision made by the Commissioner on a person’s status as a PAYE intermediary cannot be challenged. Law: IT07 ss RP 2, RP 6, YA 1; TAA ss 124H(1), 124I–124K  ¶3-476 Trust account for PAYE intermediaries There are certain restrictions in place for a PAYE intermediary’s bank account. A PAYE intermediary must establish a trust account with a registered bank. The account must be named a trust account. The only deposits that may be made to the account are: ▪ a payment of gross salary or wages by an employer ▪ an amount of employer’s superannuation cash contribution paid by an employer ▪ an amount of tax for a payment of salary or wages required under the PAYE rules and employer’s superannuation contribution tax rules or made under s RP 12 ▪ an amount of a refund made by the Commissioner (see ¶3-479), and ▪ interest on the amount of the funds in the trust account. The only withdrawals that may be made from the account are: ▪ payments of net salary or wages to employees ▪ an amount of an employer’s superannuation cash contributions paid by employers on behalf of employees ▪ an amount of tax for a payment of salary or wages withheld under s RP 12 (see ¶3-479) ▪ deductions from the salary or wages of an employee, or an employer’s superannuation cash contribution made on behalf of an employee, that the employer would otherwise make, and ▪ interest earned by the funds in the account. A payment relating to an employee that is credited to the trust account is held by the PAYE intermediary on trust for the benefit of the  employee and the Commissioner according to their respective rights and obligations. Interest earned in the trust account by a payment that relates to an employee is held beneficially by the PAYE intermediary. Law: IT07 ss RM 7, RP 6  ¶3-477 Approval of employer arrangement with PAYE intermediary An employer who wishes to engage a PAYE intermediary must notify the Commissioner. The notice must include the following details: ▪ the name of the PAYE intermediary ▪ the period for which the PAYE intermediary will act for the employer ▪ the bank account number of the PAYE intermediary’s trust account, and ▪ whether the proposed arrangement requires the PAYE intermediary to make employer’s superannuation contribution tax deductions. Notification of these details may also be made by the PAYE intermediary. The Commissioner must send a notice of approval to the employer. The approval will apply to pay periods that begin on or after the date that is 14 days after the date of the notice. For example, a notice of approval dated 1 May 2019 will apply to pay periods that begin on or after 15 May 2019. An employer or a PAYE intermediary may end an arrangement by notifying the other party and the Commissioner. The notice must state the date that is after the notification for the end of the arrangement. Law: TAA s 124O(1), (2)  ¶3-479 Responsibilities and status under PAYE rules and ESCT rules when using PAYE intermediaries  Employer An employer who uses a PAYE intermediary will generally not be subject to the PAYE rules or, if taken on by the PAYE intermediary, the ESCT rules, provided all the following conditions are met: ▪ If the employer has authorised the PAYE intermediary to direct fund transfers from the employer’s bank account in satisfaction of the obligations under the PAYE arrangement, the employer ensures that, at a time specified by the PAYE intermediary, there are sufficient funds in the employer’s bank account to satisfy the obligations of the PAYE intermediary for the pay period: see s RP 9. ▪ If the employer has not authorised the PAYE intermediary to direct fund transfers from the employer’s bank account, the employer pays into the trust account of the PAYE intermediary: □ the employees’ gross salary or wages for the pay period after deducting any amount that is owed by an employee to the employer and may be lawfully withheld by the employer from the salary or wages (s RP 10(2)) □ if the employer has made a payment of salary or wages (either by cash or cheque) to the employee (see below under the heading “Cash payments made by employer”), the deductions made as required under the PAYE rules and ESCT rules relating to that cash payment (s RP 10(1)), and □ if the PAYE intermediary has taken on the employer’s ESCT obligations, the employer’s superannuation cash contributions made in the pay period by the employer (s RP 11). ▪ The employer keeps the required records relating to payments made to employees set out in table 1 of sch 3 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) (see ¶3-131): s 22AA of the TAA. ▪ The employer provides the information requested by the PAYE intermediary within the time agreed by the employer and the intermediary: see s RP 8.  Cash payments made by employer An employer who has engaged a PAYE intermediary may, in accordance with s RP 12, make a payment of salary or wages directly to the employee if all of the following conditions are met: ▪ the payment is made on a day in a pay period that is not the usual day for a payment of salary or wages for the pay period (ie the payment is made on a day that is not a normal pay day) ▪ the payment is an advance of the employee’s salary or wages, salary or wages owed to the employee for an earlier pay period, or a payment on the termination of the employee’s employment ▪ the employer makes the deductions required under the PAYE rules and ESCT rules from the salary or wages paid as if the employer did not have a PAYE intermediary, and ▪ the PAYE and ESCT deducted by the employer is made available to the PAYE intermediary as required — see above under the heading “Employer”. However, the fact that a PAYE intermediary is used does not mean that the employer ceases to be liable for the payment of an employee’s salary or wages for the pay period or for making an employer’s superannuation cash contribution on behalf of the employee. PAYE intermediary In accordance with s RP 14 a PAYE intermediary who acts on behalf of an employer generally assumes the PAYE obligations and, if taken on, the ESCT obligations of that employer for its employees for the pay period, including the obligations to: ▪ calculate and make tax deductions and pay those deductions to the Commissioner by electronic means and in the prescribed electronic format (see ¶3-020) ▪ transfer the amount of any payroll donation to the relevant recipient within the specified time period (see ¶11-063)  ▪ deliver the relevant employment income information required under subpart 3C of the TAA to the Commissioner by electronic means and in the prescribed electronic format (see ¶3-023) ▪ keep records in accordance with s 22AA of the TAA (see ¶3-131). If a PAYE intermediary has been authorised to direct fund transfers from the employer’s bank account (see above under the heading “Employer”), the PAYE intermediary must direct that the amount of the deductions required to be made from the gross salary or wages of the employee under the PAYE rules and the ESCT rules be transferred to either the Commissioner or the PAYE intermediary’s trust account as appropriate. This direction must be made at or before the time of the transfer of the salary or wages owing to the employee: see ss RP 15 and RP 16. However, a PAYE intermediary does not become liable as an employer for the payment to the employee of the salary or wages for the pay period: see s RP 13(2). A PAYE intermediary must maintain and operate administration and information technology systems that protect the privacy of the personal information and payment details acquired in the performance of its functions. A PAYE intermediary may make an amended return relating to employees of the employer for a different pay period. The intermediary will be responsible for the accuracy of these amendments. Refund by Commissioner of Inland Revenue Under ss RA 19 and RM 7 the Commissioner must refund to a PAYE intermediary any payment of deductions that is made by the PAYE intermediary: ▪ in reliance on a payment to the trust account of the PAYE intermediary that was made by the employer and later dishonoured by the employer, or made by a person because of a mistake and later recovered from the PAYE intermediary by the person, or ▪ because of a mistake by the PAYE intermediary or another person and from funds that were not provided to the PAYE intermediary by  the employer for the payment to which the deductions relate (ie the salary or wages or employer’s superannuation cash contribution) or for the payment of the deductions. KiwiSaver A PAYE intermediary is treated as the employer for the purposes of the information required to be supplied to the Commissioner in relation to new employees pursuant to ss 22 and 23 of the KiwiSaver Act 2006. Part 3 of the KiwiSaver Act deals with KiwiSaver contributions. The role of employers under that Part also applies to PAYE intermediaries. Law: IT07 ss RA 19, RM 7, RP 7–RP 16; TAA ss 22AA, 124P, 124Q, sch 3; KIW ss 23A, 63  ¶3-480 Termination of employer arrangements with PAYE intermediaries An arrangement between an employer and a PAYE intermediary may be ended by either party giving notice to the other and to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. Notice may be given to the Commissioner on form IR 913. The notice of termination must state the date on which the arrangement will end. This date must be one that occurs after the date on which the notice is given. A person who stops being a PAYE intermediary (or, prior to 1 April 2020, listed intermediary) for an employer has the rights and obligations under the PAYE rules and ESCT rules of a PAYE intermediary (or listed intermediary) for funds that: ▪ the employer pays to the person as intermediary, and ▪ the person holds at the time they stop being an intermediary. As a result of the repeal of the payroll subsidy from 1 April 2020, listed PAYE intermediaries were also repealed from 1 April 2020. Law: IT07 s RP 2(3); TAA s 124O  ¶3-482 PAYE intermediaries and use of money interest Generally, a PAYE intermediary is subject to use of money interest on any over- or underpayment of PAYE for employers for whom the PAYE intermediary acts. The PAYE intermediary is liable for interest only if the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ the employer has met the obligations imposed under ss RP 9–RP 11 (see the first two bullet points in ¶3-479 under the heading “Employer”), and ▪ the employer has provided any information requested by the PAYE intermediary by the agreed date: see s RP 8. Note that the Commissioner cannot apply interest payable on PAYE overpaid by the PAYE intermediary towards the payment of the PAYE intermediary’s unpaid tax. Interest receivable by a PAYE intermediary on overpaid PAYE may not be: ▪ treated as tax overpaid by the PAYE intermediary in any other capacity, or ▪ transferred to the PAYE intermediary in another capacity or to another taxpayer. The provisions relating to the cancellation, remission, relief and refund of use of money interest also apply to a PAYE intermediary. See s 185B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and ¶22-200 and ¶22-355. Law: TAA ss 120OB, 120OC, 173MB, 185B  ¶3-485 Penalties for PAYE intermediaries A PAYE intermediary is generally subject to late filing penalties, late payment penalties and shortfall penalties on any unpaid PAYE as if that person were the employer unless the employer has failed to: ▪ pay the gross salary or wages to the intermediary in accordance with ss RP 9 to RP 11 (see the first two bullet points in ¶3-479  under the heading “Employer”) ▪ provide any information requested by the PAYE intermediary by the agreed date. If the employer does not satisfy the above conditions, the late filing, late payment and shortfall penalties on any unpaid PAYE will continue to be the liability of the employer. The non-electronic filing penalty also applies to a PAYE intermediary, see ¶14-045. The provisions relating to the recovery, remission, and refund of penalties also apply to a PAYE intermediary. Law: TAA ss 141JB, 185B  ¶3-490 PAYE intermediaries and PAYE subsidy for small businesses Prior to 1 April 2020, a government subsidy was available to help small employers meet the cost of engaging a payroll intermediary. The subsidy was introduced to encourage small employers to use payroll agents to manage their payroll obligations. The level of subsidy was set by regulation. The Income Tax (Payroll Subsidy) Regulations 2006 had set the payroll subsidy at $2 per employee per pay day, up to a maximum of five employees per employer. A small employer was one whose gross tax deductions (including ESCT) were less than $50,000 ($500,000 prior to 1 April 2019) in the preceding tax year. New employers could estimate if their tax deductions would be below the threshold for the current year. The Commissioner also had a discretion to allow the subsidy if the threshold was breached because of a non-recurring amount, such as a redundancy or retirement payment. The subsidy was paid to the PAYE intermediary, who then applied that money to meet or reduce the amount payable by the employer for the  payroll services. However, the payroll subsidy was repealed with effect from 1 April 2020. Law: IT07 ss RP 3–RP 5; TAA ss 124H(2), 124L–124N, 124R; Income Tax (Payroll Subsidy) Regulations 2006  ¶3-491 Listed PAYE intermediaries The payroll subsidy was repealed from 1 April 2020 and, as a consequence, listed PAYE intermediaries were also repealed from that date. Approval as listed PAYE intermediary Prior to 1 April 2020, for a PAYE intermediary to be eligible to receive the subsidy, the intermediary had to be approved as a “listed PAYE intermediary”. To become a listed PAYE intermediary, an intermediary had to: ▪ meet the requirements of a PAYE intermediary under s 124I of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see ¶3-475) ▪ have completed and filed all required returns of income, and ▪ have paid the required amounts of tax due. A person could only be a listed PAYE intermediary if they were already accredited as a PAYE intermediary. Once they gained approval as a listed PAYE intermediary, they had to inform an employer who contracted for their services as a listed PAYE intermediary that the Commissioner did not guarantee payment by the intermediary to an employee of the employer or the performance of a service provided by them: see s 124L(3). The Commissioner could approve a PAYE intermediary as a listed PAYE intermediary for a set period under s 124L(4). Obligations of a listed PAYE intermediary Once registered, the ongoing obligations of a listed PAYE intermediary included:  ▪ continuing to meet the obligations of an accredited PAYE intermediary under subpart RP ▪ continuing to satisfy the requirements of a listed PAYE intermediary ▪ maintaining the required administrative and IT systems ▪ correctly returning the subsidy claim form, and ▪ keeping the necessary records to verify each subsidy claim. The listing of a listed PAYE intermediary could be revoked if these obligations were not met. Claiming the subsidy A subsidy was paid to a listed PAYE intermediary working for a small employer if the intermediary: ▪ had contracted with the employer for the provision of payroll services ▪ had met its obligations under subpart RP, and ▪ filed a correct subsidy claim form. Inland Revenue then electronically paid the subsidy to the listed PAYE intermediary within 30 days of receiving from the intermediary the necessary employment income information, the PAYE deductions and the subsidy claim form relating to the claim. The subsidy was GSTinclusive and subject to income tax. Law: IT07 ss RP 3–RP 5, RZ 14; TAA ss 124H(2), 124L–124N, 124R; Income Tax (Payroll Subsidy) Regulations 2006  ASSESSMENTS AND DISPUTES RESOLUTION Assessments  ¶4-010  Disputes Resolution Procedure  ¶4-120  Notices of Proposed Adjustment and Response ¶4-130 Conference Stage  ¶4-175  Disclosure  ¶4-180  Adjudication  ¶4-195  Challenge  ¶4-215  Appealing a Decision  ¶4-260  ASSESSMENTS ¶4-010 Introduction to assessments For income tax purposes, an assessment is defined as an assessment of tax by either a taxpayer or the Commissioner, any amendment made by the Commissioner to an assessment and an assessment of net loss, terminal tax or a refund. Under the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985, an assessment means an assessment of a GST refund. Taxpayers who are required to file income tax returns (¶2-010) must assess their own tax liabilities. A notice of self-assessment is required with the taxpayer’s return of income. These taxpayers are responsible for: ▪ considering the facts relating to their own financial affairs  ▪ interpreting and applying the law to those facts ▪ determining the amount of tax owing, and ▪ making that determination with an appropriate degree of finality. The assessment is made on the date that Inland Revenue receives the return. For individuals to whom Pt 3, subpart 3B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 applies (¶2-016), they are treated as having made an assessment on the date their pre-populated account is finalised under s 22H. Self-assessment does not apply to a taxpayer in a tax year if the taxpayer receives family assistance for the tax year or the taxpayer has been assessed by the Commissioner. The liability for tax exists whether or not a taxpayer assesses his or her own liability. Consequently, the late filing penalty continues to apply. The Commissioner has the power to issue default assessments or assessments following an investigation. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 33, 92  ¶4-020 Commissioner’s statutory assessing function Two points should be noted in relation to the Commissioner’s statutory assessing function (ie generally, to make default or amended assessments). First, when the Commissioner is discharging this statutory assessing function, he is performing a duty imposed on him in imperative and unconditional terms. See C of IR v Lemmington Holdings Ltd (1982) 5 NZTC 61,268. Secondly, the Commissioner’s statutory functions are directed to the quantification of the liability for tax which is imposed by the statute itself. He may not be estopped by his past conduct from performing his statutory obligations in making assessments reflecting his current judgment as to that statutorily imposed liability. See North Island Wholesale  Groceries Ltd v Hewin (1982) 5 NZTC 61,289, Case S74 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,459, Golden Bay Cement Co Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,580. Example: The making of an assessment, including an amended assessment, requires the exercise of judgment on the part of the Commissioner in quantifying that liability on the information then in the Commissioner’s possession. It involves the ascertainment of the taxable income and of the resulting tax liability. A decision that is tentative, provisional, conditional or subject to adjustment is not an assessment within the meaning of the tax legislation. To constitute an assessment for income tax purposes, the Commissioner’s decision must be definitive as to the liability of the taxpayer at the time it was made and final subject only to challenge through the objection process. See C of IR v Canterbury Frozen Meat Co Ltd (1994) 16 NZTC 11,150.  An assessment by the Commissioner is made as part of the care and management function imposed by ss 6 and 6A of the Tax Administration Act 1994. See ¶1-512.  ¶4-030 Non-arbitrary assessment When making an assessment, the Commissioner is not entitled to act arbitrarily in disregard of the law or the facts as known to him. If his assessment is not made on an intelligible basis, it may not stand. Example 1: In formulating an assessment, the Commissioner might be required to exercise his judgment in determining the assessable income of the taxpayer. The taxpayer would be able to discharge the onus of proof if he or she could show that the Commissioner’s assessment was no more than arbitrary conjecture or was demonstrably unfair, or was unsupportable for lack of any sensible basis. See Lowe v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,006.  Example 2: Three alternative notices of amended assessment issued simultaneously to a taxpayer were void. The Commissioner had issued the assessments because he considered that there were at least three ways of calculating the tax benefit received  by the taxpayer. In judicial review proceedings, the Federal Court held that the assessments were invalid because the taxpayer’s liability was not fixed. See Stokes v FC of T 96 ATC 4393.  Example 3: A rigid following of Inland Revenue policy, and a failure by the Commissioner to properly consider and weigh the merits of a taxpayer’s position, led to the Court of Appeal finding that the Commissioner’s decision not to exercise his discretion and make certain adjustments and issue reassessments was not a valid exercise of that discretion. See Lawton v C of IR (2003) 21 NZTC 18,042.  ¶4-040 Notice of assessment A return of income filed by a taxpayer must contain notice of the selfassessment made by the taxpayer. The finalisation of certain pre-populated accounts are deemed to be assessments. See ¶4-044. As soon as it is convenient after an assessment has been made by the Commissioner, the Commissioner must give notice of the assessment to the taxpayer. The Commissioner need notify the taxpayer of only the amount of tax payable or the tax refund (as appropriate) if: ▪ the taxpayer’s self-assessment is correct ▪ the assessment is a default assessment ▪ the assessment is a deemed assessment on the finalisation of the taxpayer’s pre-populated account ▪ the assessment is made as a result of a taxpayer’s failure to inform the Commissioner that details in a pre-populated account are incorrect or incomplete, or ▪ the Commissioner issues a separate statement setting out the matters required to be specified in the assessment.  Any failure on the part of the Commissioner to give to the taxpayer a notice of assessment does not invalidate that assessment. See s 111 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The rules for giving notice are discussed in ¶1-645. If the Commissioner makes an assessment in relation to GST payable for goods sold in satisfaction of debt, the Commissioner is required to send a copy of the assessment to the person whose goods were sold or the person selling the goods, whoever was not assessed. The assessment process performed by the Commissioner is distinct from the requirement to give the taxpayer a notice of assessment. In C of IR v Hyslop (2000) 19 NZTC 15,560 (reversing Case T49 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,335), the High Court held that it is not a fundamental part of the assessment process that the objector be notified of the reasons for the assessment. The assessment process is complete before the obligation to give notice arises. Even if a notice of assessment should contain reasons, a failure to give proper reasons does not invalidate the assessment. This decision was affirmed on appeal in Hyslop v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,031 (CA). See also Dandelion Investments Ltd v C of IR (2003) 21 NZTC 18,010 (CA). Assessments and determinations made by a computer or other electronic means as a result of information entered or held in the computer are treated as made by or under the properly delegated authority of the Commissioner. See s 105 of the TAA. Validity of assessment The validity of an assessment made by the Commissioner is not affected by any non-compliance with the TAA or any of the Inland Revenue Acts (listed in Schedule 1 to the TAA). An assessment made by the Commissioner is also not invalidated if it is made wholly or partially in compliance with: ▪ a direction or recommendation made by an authorised officer on matters relating to the assessment, or  ▪ an approved current policy or practice that is applicable to the assessment. See s 114 of the TAA. Law: TAA ss 33, 105, 111, 114  ¶4-044 Finalisation of pre-populated account deemed to be an assessment Recent changes to individuals’ year-end tax obligations are intended to ensure that most individuals pay what they need to and receive what they are entitled to during the year, without the need to file returns or claim refunds. The changes apply from 1 April 2019 for the year-end processes for the 2018–19 and later income years and are fully discussed at ¶2-016. In summary, by receiving regular income information throughout the year, Inland Revenue (IR) will ensure individuals are on the appropriate tax code or rate and that about the right amount of tax is withheld throughout the year. A pre-populated account based on all the income information held will then be created. For most individuals, their tax position (refund or tax to pay) will effectively be automatically calculated. Essentially, only those people who earn income or have deductions that IR does not already know about will have to provide further information. Once the information in the prepopulated account is complete and correct, the account will then be finalised. The final account of an individual is treated as a return of income and an assessment, and the individual is treated as having made a statement of their tax position (s 22I(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA)). The date of the assessment is the date the individual’s pre-populated account is finalised (s 22I(2)). If the individual does not satisfy the Commissioner that their income is correctly and completely recorded in their pre-populated account, the date the assessment is made is when the Commissioner provides a default assessment under s 106 of the TAA (s 22I(3)).  In addition, if the Commissioner considers that the information provided in an individual’s final account is not likely to be correct, the Commissioner may make a default assessment under s 106(1A) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. In any event, the Commissioner must notify an individual when the assessment is made (see ¶4-040). Law: TAA ss 22H, 22I, 92, 106  ¶4-055 Assessment of ancillary taxes The Tax Administration Act 1994 provides for the assessment of certain ancillary taxes including fringe benefit tax, employer’s superannuation contribution tax, retirement scheme contribution withholding tax, resident and non-resident withholding tax, imputation penalty tax, Māori authority distribution penalty tax, R&D repayment tax, further income tax and imputation additional tax. A GST-registered person must make a self-assessment of GST payable in a return period. The assessment is made on the date that Inland Revenue receives the GST return. Self-assessment of GST does not apply for a GST return period if the Commissioner has made an assessment of GST payable for that period. Law: TAA ss 92B, 93, 97–101B  ¶4-060 Special assessment In extraordinary circumstances, special assessments may be made based on special returns requested by the Commissioner. Examples include a non-resident trader, a person believed to be about to leave New Zealand or a person who has become bankrupt. The basic rates may be used when an early assessment is made. When necessary, that early assessment will be adjusted if the annual taxing Act subsequently alters the rates applicable to the year of income. Law: TAA ss 44, 92A  ¶4-070 Default assessment The Commissioner may make an estimated assessment if a taxpayer fails to make a return (including a GST return), files an unsatisfactory return or disputes being a taxpayer. Under such an assessment, commonly referred to as a “default assessment”, the taxpayer must either pay the amount assessed or prove that the estimate is wrong or excessive. The onus is on the taxpayer to establish that the assessment is wrong and by how much. The Commissioner usually makes a default assessment on an estimated figure likely to be higher than the income actually earned. The use of the default assessment procedure is an effective way of ensuring that actual returns are furnished. If the default assessments do not have some credible or reasonable basis, the taxpayer’s return may be accepted as being the more correct of the two. See Case F144 (1984) 6 NZTC 60,270. The Commissioner may also issue an assessment for the amount of tax that she considers ought to be imposed when she considers the information provided in an individual’s final account is not likely to be correct. The Commissioner may also issue a default assessment where an individual considers an error has arisen in their prepopulated or final account but they do not notify the Commissioner or provide the information to correct the account. See ¶2-016 and ¶4044. Law: TAA s 106  ¶4-080 Effect of assessment The assessment process does not itself impose the liability to pay tax; as McCarthy J pointed out in Reckitt and Colman (New Zealand) Ltd v Taxation Board of Review [1966] NZLR 1032, it is the Income Tax Act itself that imposes, independently, the obligation to pay tax, the assessment process being merely the machinery for quantifying the amount of tax due.  Section 109 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) provides that, except in objection proceedings under Pt 8 or a challenge under Pt 8A, a disputable decision shall be conclusively deemed to be correct and the taxpayer’s liability determined accordingly. (A disputable decision is an assessment or some other decision made by the Commissioner which is open to objection or challenge proceedings and includes certain discretionary powers available to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue in the disputes resolution process — see definition of “disputable decision” in s 3(1).) The general proposition is that a taxpayer may challenge the correctness of an assessment only by invoking the appropriate challenge procedures provided for under the TAA. The same proposition applies to one of the Commissioner’s determinations. The possibility of a challenge to an assessment outside the scope of the statutory procedures, by way of judicial review, is discussed at ¶4-275. An assessment can also affect the Commissioner’s powers of recovery. Hieber v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,716 held that the Commissioner can apply s 157 of the TAA (see ¶2-190) to require deductions to be made from amounts payable to a person owing tax, once an assessment triggering a liability to pay non-deferrable tax has been issued. (Note that there is now no definition of nondeferrable tax accompanying the definition of deferrable tax.) Law: TAA ss 3(1), 109  ¶4-090 Amended assessment The Commissioner is authorised under s 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) to make any alterations to an assessment in order to ensure the correctness of that assessment, notwithstanding that the tax already assessed may have been paid. If any such alteration or addition has the effect of imposing any fresh liability or increasing any existing liability, the Commissioner must issue a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) to the taxpayer. A NOPA is most commonly issued after an audit by the Commissioner. If issues are identified during the course of the audit and agreement  on them cannot be reached, the Commissioner issues the NOPA. This will lead to full disclosure and statement of position by each party. See further at ¶4-185. Amending an assessment during the disputes process The Commissioner’s power to amend an assessment under s 113 of the TAA is restricted if all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ a NOPA has been issued ▪ the dispute has not been resolved by agreement between the Commissioner and the disputant, and ▪ none of the following situations (set out in s 89N(1)(c)) apply: □ the Commissioner notifies the disputant that, in the Commissioner’s opinion, the disputant has committed an offence under an Inland Revenue Act in the course of the dispute and this has delayed the completion of the disputes process □ the Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that the disputant, or an associated person of the disputant, might take steps in relation to the disputant’s assets to avoid or delay the collection of tax from the disputant □ the disputant has begun judicial review proceedings in relation to the dispute □ an associated person of the disputant involved in another dispute with the Commissioner on similar issues has begun judicial review proceedings in relation to that other dispute □ the disputant has failed to comply, within the specified period, with a requirement under a statute to produce information received from the Commissioner relating to the dispute  □ the disputant and the Commissioner agree, recording their agreement in a document, that they have reached a position in which the dispute would be resolved more efficiently by being submitted to the court or Taxation Review Authority without completion of the disputes process — also known as truncation of the disputes resolution process (see ¶4-179), or □ the disputant and the Commissioner agree, recording their agreement in a document, to suspend proceedings in the disputes process pending a decision in a test case (see ¶4250). If the above criteria are satisfied, the Commissioner will not be able to amend an assessment under s 113 until one of the following events has occurred: ▪ the Commissioner or the disputant accepts a NOPA, notice of response or statement of position issued by the other party, or ▪ the Commissioner considers a statement of position issued by the disputant. This restriction will not prevent the Commissioner from making an application to the High Court for an order that allows more time for the completion of the disputes process or for an order that completion of the disputes process is not required: see s 89N(2) of the TAA and C of IR v Rabobank New Zealand Ltd (2009) 24 NZTC 23,170. Such an application must be made within the period of time during which the Commissioner would otherwise be required to make an amended assessment. If an application is made to the High Court for an extension of time to complete the disputes process or for an order that the disputes process is not required, the Commissioner will be required to make an amended assessment by the last day of the period that: ▪ begins on the day following the day by which the Commissioner, in the absence of the application, would be required to make the  amended assessment, and ▪ contains the total of: □ the number of days between the date the application is filed in the High Court by the Commissioner and the earlier of the date of the High Court’s decision or the date the dispute is resolved, and □ the number of days allowed by an order of the court as a result of the application. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 48 (SPS 16/05, Appendix 2, Exception 7). Refunds For commentary on assessments or reassessments and the Commissioner’s duty to refund excess tax paid, see ¶2-145. IR 10 and amended assessments Taxpayers may file an IR 10 form with their income tax returns instead of attaching a full set of financial statements. IR’s policy on reopening assessments where an IR 10 is filed in substitution for financial statements is set out in operational statement OS 16/01, “Filing an IR 10 and section 108 of the Tax Administration Act 1994” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 89). The statement sets out the Commissioner’s preference for the majority of taxpayers to file an IR 10 rather than financial statements to bring income to the attention of the Commissioner when filing their annual return. The statement amalgamates and replaces all previous items published by the Commissioner about income disclosure using an IR 10 and the impact of this on the time bar under s 108 of the TAA, and applies to all decisions that may require the re-opening of a return made on or after 26 May 2016. The statement makes clear the Commissioner can reopen a statutebarred assessment if the return was fraudulent or wilfully misleading, regardless of which method was used to disclose income.  In the case of omission of income: ▪ If the IR 10 discloses the income, gain or receipt, the time bar will apply. ▪ Where the IR 10, although fully completed and consistent with the financial statements, does not disclose the income, gain or receipt due to limitations in the IR 10 form, the following approach will apply: □ If the unfiled financial statements disclose the income, gain or receipt, the return will not be amended even though the financial statements were not sent to IR at the time the income tax return was filed. □ If neither the IR 10 nor the unfiled financial statements disclose the income, gain, or receipt, the return will be subject to Critical Task Assurance and review by senior Service Delivery management to determine whether the time bar applies. The statement notes that this approach will not apply if an IR 10 is filed, instead of a financial statement, in two circumstances — reconstructed income and aggressive tax schemes or tax avoidance. Self-assessment of tax liability Under the disputes resolution process, a taxpayer may dispute an assessment made by the Commissioner. However, self-assessment means that the Commissioner no longer makes the initial assessment. Therefore, taxpayers disputing an initial assessment are, in effect, “disputing” their own assessment. Although the taxpayers’ ability to amend their own assessments might be seen as inconsistent with the necessary element of finality that characterises an assessment, an advantage to taxpayers in being able to dispute an assessment is to eliminate their exposure to shortfall penalties. The taxpayers’ right to amend their own assessments is retained under self-assessment in accordance with s 89DA of the TAA. The amendments are initiated by a NOPA.  A taxpayer has four months to amend the taxpayer’s own assessment. The four-month period begins on the date on which the taxpayer’s notice of assessment is received at an IR office. ▸Note: There is arguably a loophole in the current disputes procedures that allows a taxpayer to circumvent the time limit for challenging an assessment. This involves the taxpayer making a voluntary disclosure for a particular item, which arguably could allow them to reopen the entire original assessment, circumventing the time limit. The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to close this potential loophole with effect from the day the Bill is enacted. Taxpayers must also self-assess their GST liability and have the right to amend their GST assessments within four months of the date on which the self-assessment is received at an IR office. See also standard practice statement SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 50. Commissioner’s practice The Commissioner has released standard practice statement SPS 20/03, “Requests to amend assessments” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 11), on the exercise of the Commissioner’s discretion to amend assessments to ensure that they are correct. The statement applies in respect of the exercise of the Commissioner’s discretion to amend assessments under s 113 of the TAA. The statement applies from 2 June 2020 and replaces all previous statements on the exercise of the Commissioner’s discretion under s 113. For further discussion on the exercise of the Commissioner’s discretion to amend assessments, see ¶2-112. Amendment of minor errors in returns For commentary on a taxpayer’s ability to correct minor, or not material, errors made in a return in a subsequent return, see ¶2-112 and s 113A of the TAA.  Law: TAA ss 89AB(3), 89DA, 89N, 113, 113A  ¶4-110 Limitation of time and Commissioner’s power to amend assessments The Commissioner’s power to issue amended assessments is subject to a four-year time limit. The concept of an assessment in the time bar rule includes all lawful amendments that may have been made to the original assessment: Dandelion Investments Ltd v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,585 (CA) at 15,588. Dandelion Investments dealt with s 25(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976, now s 108 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The Court of Appeal noted that, generally, there is a cumulative process when an assessment is made and then amended. The normal and natural effect of an amendment is that the two or more assessments must be read together. The Commissioner cannot issue an amended assessment increasing the liability for tax (or decreasing the amount of a net loss) once four years have elapsed from the end of the tax year in which the tax return was filed. The limitation periods do not apply in circumstances in which: ▪ the Commissioner considers that the return is fraudulent or wilfully misleading, or ▪ the return omits mention of income of a particular nature or from a particular source. Example 1: The Commissioner issued reassessments for a taxpayer under s 25 of the Income Tax Act 1976 (now s 108 of the TAA) on the basis that the returns failed to disclose rental income or profits on the sale of two properties. In the course of his decision, the Taxation Review Authority expressed the view that it was necessary only for the Commissioner to form an opinion, in good faith and on reasonable grounds, that returns were fraudulent or wilfully misleading or omitted to mention a particular type of income. See Case M83 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,498.  Example 2: A tax return found to be wilfully misleading enabled the Commissioner to reopen a taxpayer’s return so as to issue a reassessment for the 1989 income year. The taxpayer company filed its return for the 1989 year, signed by its principal. The return, so the TRA found, omitted to disclose the fact that a contingent liability to pay the balance purchase price of certain bloodstock had been eliminated by a subsequent agreement. The company’s accountants had prepared the return but the principal had deliberately closed his eyes to the consequences of not alerting them to the full facts. The Commissioner was entitled to form the opinion that the 1989 return was wilfully misleading by substantially overstating the company’s sundry creditors. The 1989 return could therefore be reopened and reassessed: see Case W26 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,263. However, the Commissioner was unable to support the 1989 reassessment under the Income Tax Act 1994. The Commissioner was also confined to the grounds upon which he made the assessment. See Case W31 (2004) 21 NZTC 11,311.  Example 3: The TRA upheld the Commissioner’s decisions under s 108(2) to open the time bar and amend the taxpayers’ assessments, and also held that shortfall penalties for gross carelessness should be imposed. The TRA held that there was sufficient evidential basis to enable the Commissioner to form an honest opinion that the income tax returns in the relevant years were fraudulent or wilfully misleading. Therefore, the Commissioner was entitled to open the time bar. Having the knowledge and intention that the tax returns are wrong or being reckless as to whether or not the tax returns are wrong can be sufficient to meet the “fraudulent or wilfully misleading” test under s 108(2) (Babington v C of IR (No 2) [1958] NZLR 152; Case K48 (1988) 10 NZTC 397 cited). The TAA provides for two distinct steps as part of the reassessment process when the time bar created by s 108(10) of the TAA applies. The first is the need for the Commissioner to form an opinion under s 108(2), which provides the triggering event for reassessment. The second is for the Commissioner to reassess, a process that brings into play other provisions of the TAA dealing with assessment generally (Vinelight Nominees Ltd v C of IR (No 2) (2005) 22 NZTC 19,519, Auckland Institute of Studies Ltd v C of IR (2002) 20 NZTC 17,685 cited). The two cases of Auckland Institute of Studies Ltd and Vinelight Nominees Ltd (No 2) make it clear that in the first step of the two-step reassessment process under the TAA (being the reopening of the time bar), the taxpayer is not in a position to challenge the correctness of the Commissioner’s opinion and the Hearing Authority may not substitute its own opinion for that of the Commissioner. At the second step of the process, after the time bar has been reopened, the taxpayer may challenge substantively the reassessment made by the Commissioner. In the present case, the second step was not in issue. See Case 9/2015 (2015) 27 NZTC ¶3-008.  The four-year time limit provided by s 108 overrides any other provision that limits the Commissioner’s right to amend assessments. See s 108(3) of the TAA. Amendments clarified that the time bar applies to ancillary taxes (such as PAYE, FBT, RWT, NRWT) and the approved issuer levy (AIL). The filing of the relevant return for each of the ancillary taxes and the statement for AIL is treated as an income tax return and as the making of an assessment. The four-year period runs from the end of the period for which the taxpayer furnished the return or statement. The Commissioner cannot increase an amount of an ancillary tax or AIL return if four years have passed from the end of the period in which the taxpayer provided the relevant return (unless one of the existing exceptions applies). In addition, from 1 April 2019, for the 2018–19 and later income years, the payment of a refund of a tax credit for a charitable gift under s 41A is treated as an assessment and the four-year time bar period for the Commissioner to amend the tax credit claim starts at the end of the tax year in which the person applies for the refund. Non-standard balance date taxpayers In response to a question asked, the Commissioner released a statement that clarifies when the four-year time bar in s 108 of the TAA commences for taxpayers with a non-standard balance date. It is the Commissioner’s view that the time bar begins on 1 April after the tax return is provided by the taxpayer. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 14, No 11, November 2002 at 94. Example 4: A taxpayer’s non-standard balance date of 30 September 2012 is deemed to be in respect of the 2011–12 corresponding income year, ie 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2012. If the taxpayer provides his or her 2011–12 tax return on 15 January 2013, the time bar begins on 1 April 2013. Increases to the assessment generally become time barred after 31 March 2017.  Impact of COVID-19 virus on time bar  Inland Revenue announced that it would waive any late filing penalties if a taxpayer’s 2018–19 income tax return was filed late due to the impact of COVID-19. However, the late filing of an income return also has an impact on the time bar. For example, if a 2019 income tax return is filed late, in May 2020, the time bar will be extended to 31 March 2025 (rather than the normal 31 March 2024). In these circumstances, Inland Revenue stated that it will close any review or other compliance activity as at 31 March 2024 for any 2019 return that is: ▪ due on or before 31 March 2020 and furnished after 31 March but before 31 May 2020 due to the impact of COVID-19 ▪ not subject to any existing exclusions from the standard four-year time bar ▪ not subject to a dispute: □ commenced by a notice of proposed adjustment issued before 1 January 2023, and □ involving alleged tax avoidance, or □ having tax in dispute of greater than $200m. It is important to note that any delay in filing must be due to COVID19 for the above concession to apply. Extension to time limit The four-year time bar may be extended: ▪ for 12 months if the Commissioner and the taxpayer agree and their agreement is recorded in a document (note that the Commissioner has prescribed form IR 775 for this purpose and it must be delivered to the Commissioner before the expiry of the four-year period), and ▪ for a further six months after the end of the 12-month period by notice given by the taxpayer.  Despite any agreed extension to the time bar, the time bar still applies to an assessment made on a ground that was not identified and not known to the taxpayer and the Commissioner before the time at which the time bar would have applied if the extension had not been agreed to. In other words, the Commissioner is not allowed to raise new issues during the period of the time bar waiver. In Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 3, August 1996 at 34, it is stated that there are two probable situations when a taxpayer might elect to waive the time bar. The first is when the dispute is not resolved and more time would allow completion of the disputes resolution procedures with the mutual agreement of both parties. This would obviate the need for the Commissioner to issue an assessment. The second is when there is another case before the court which is likely to resolve the issue in the current dispute. Example 5: In a preliminary hearing, the TRA considered whether the time bar waiver created a separate limitation period under s 108B that could not be extended and concluded it did not. By signing the waiver the parties simply agreed that the imposition of the time bar specified in s 108 would be delayed for a period of 12 months. The purpose of s 108B was to remove the need for the Commissioner to issue an assessment based on incomplete facts because the time bar against reassessment was due to come into effect. There was no obligation on a taxpayer to agree to an extension of time. There was no restriction on the application of s 108B to situations where an investigation was underway or to the circumstances when the Commissioner and a taxpayer can agree to a waiver. In that case, the Commissioner issued amended assessments after the end of the waiver under s 108(2) as she had formed the opinion that the returns were fraudulent or wilfully misleading or omitted income. See Case 8/2016 (2016) 27 NZTC ¶3-030.  See [36]–[42] of the standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue” for a discussion on the exceptions to the statutory time bar. This SPS is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 14. GST returns  Except in cases in which a taxpayer has knowingly or fraudulently failed to make full and true disclosure of all material facts necessary to determine the taxpayer’s GST liability, there is also a four-year time bar for GST returns filed. Generally the time allowed for making or amending assessments is limited to four years from the end of the GST return period in which the GST return was provided. See s 108A of the TAA. The extension of the four-year time bar also applies to GST returns. Law: TAA ss 41A, 108, 108A, 108B  ¶4-115 No time limit for amending assessments or determinations Several provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007 and the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) provide that the Commissioner may issue an amended assessment regardless of the four-year time limit imposed under s 108 of the TAA and, therefore, irrespective of whether there has been any element of tax evasion. Some of those provisions are as follows: ▪ s EH 27 concerning assessment of income equalisation refunds upon retirement or death ▪ s LA 6(3) in relation to the use of remaining refundable credits ▪ s 44B of the TAA for an adjustment made to a financial arrangement under s EW 53 ▪ s 113B of the TAA concerning dividends recovered or repaid, and ▪ s 138P of the TAA concerning determinations or assessments made by the Taxation Review Authority or the Commissioner in conforming to a determination of the Authority.  ¶4-118 Reaching agreement after an Inland Revenue audit  Inland Revenue (IR) has long had a practice of resolving tax disputes that arise after a tax investigation by reaching agreement with the taxpayer concerned. Such agreements, once finalised and signed by both parties, are binding (subject to certain exceptions outlined below). This procedure for making agreements is outside the formal disputes process outlined at ¶4-120, and only applies if no assessment has been issued. IR’s practice guidelines for settling disputes once an assessment has been issued and challenge proceedings commenced are outlined at ¶4-232. Standard practice statement SPS 15/01, “Finalising agreements in tax investigations”, was issued in August 2015 and published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 9, October 2015 at 24. The SPS sets out how taxpayers and IR staff should seek to resolve matters that are in doubt or in dispute when an investigation is being finalised. The SPS states that it is essential for IR and taxpayers that a code of good practice as to how issues are resolved and agreements finalised be defined. The SPS is intended to ensure taxpayers will be treated consistently when entering discussions and negotiations, and will be treated impartially and in accordance with the law by IR. The SPS states that IR will not negotiate a final agreement if: ▪ an amount is clearly assessable or a deduction, rebate or credit is clearly not allowable ▪ IR’s view of the law on a particular issue is firm and this view is supported by the evidence ▪ the only consideration is the taxpayer’s ability to pay ▪ an adjustment can be made only on an “all or nothing basis”, ie either an adjustment would be made for the total amount in question or no adjustment made at all, or ▪ the matter relates to use of money and/or prosecution action. The circumstances in which IR may enter into negotiations are: ▪ the quantum of a disputed amount depends on the facts  ▪ an adjustment may rely on a question of valuation for which there are competing bases ▪ an item may not be subject to precise computation — for example, the estimation of living expenses in an asset accretion assessment, or ▪ an issue of quantum or valuation has been resolved for one period and is likely to apply to prior periods. Penalties, if applicable, should be discussed and can be included in the final agreement. This includes shortfall penalties and late payment penalties. Failure to agree on penalties will not preclude an agreement on the substantive issues, as the penalties issue can be continued under the disputes resolution process. A taxpayer’s ability to pay is not relevant in determining a taxpayer’s liability, but may give rise to other administrative arrangements tailored to the taxpayer’s circumstances (such as relief under the hardship provisions, establishment of an instalment arrangement, applying to have tax written off). Once an agreement has been finalised and signed by both parties, IR will adhere to its terms for the period covered by the audit. The taxpayer is precluded from raising the agreed issues in the disputes process. The agreement is not binding if subsequent evidence of avoidance, evasion or fraud is found, or if the taxpayer has failed to disclose all relevant facts. Care and management statement See also interpretation statement IS 10/07, “Care and management of the taxes covered by the Inland Revenue Acts” (October 2010), Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 17, for a discussion of the effect of the care and management provisions in ss 6 and 6A of the Tax Administration Act on settlements: see [151]– [161]. Distinction is made between the Commissioner’s ability to settle litigation, and whether the Commissioner can settle tax disputes before litigation or the formal disputes process has started. The courts have recognised that the Commissioner is empowered to  settle litigation after carefully considering the litigation risks and careful management of resources. See ¶4-232. The courts, however, have not specifically considered whether the Commissioner can settle tax disputes before the disputes process or litigation has commenced. The Commissioner’s view is that she is able to do so. On 1 September 2016, IR released “Operational guidelines: section 6A settlements”, which set out the principles and processes by which Investigations & Advice might settle a dispute (or a potential dispute). The guidelines apply to settlements that occur at any stage of the disputes process before the filing of a challenge in the Taxation Review Authority or the High Court. They also apply to the settlement of cases before the commencement of the disputes process. The guidelines set out that, when considering a “settlement” of a tax liability in a dispute, the starting point is that the law should be applied correctly and that IR should seek to recover all of the tax which is due. Recognising that IR cannot do so in all cases, and where a dispute is commenced with the taxpayer, the guidelines provide a set of criteria which can be taken into account, depending on the particular case, and some guiding principles as to how much weight should be applied to those criteria.  DISPUTES RESOLUTION PROCEDURE ¶4-120 Disputes resolution procedure — background Part 4A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 relating to disputes resolution procedures and Pt 8A relating to challenges came into effect on 1 October 1996. A review of the tax disputes process was completed in 2003 (see the discussion document Resolving tax disputes: a legislative review) and amending legislation was enacted in 2004, effective 1 April 2005, to ensure that the procedure operated fairly and efficiently. For a brief summary of the changes, see CCH, 2005 New Zealand Master Tax Guide, at ¶4-120 and also Tax Information Bulletin Vol  17, No 1, February 2005 at 53–63. For discussion of the disputes process for disputes commenced from 1 October 1996 to 31 March 2005, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 3, August 1996. The disputes resolution and challenge provisions of the Tax Administration Act apply to all issues concerning taxes and duties administered by the Commissioner, other than assessments issued to liable parents pursuant to the Child Support Act 1991. The procedures anticipate considerable dialogue and disclosure by both the taxpayer and the Commissioner, including the issue of a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA), a response notice, a disclosure notice from the Commissioner and a taxpayer’s statement of position. Once the exchange of views and information seems to have crystallised the parties’ respective positions, the Commissioner will issue the appropriate assessment. The taxpayer then has two months to commence proceedings under the challenge provisions of Pt 8A. The disputes resolution process is broken down into six identifiable phases: ▪ issue of a NOPA ▪ conference (an administrative phase) ▪ disclosure ▪ adjudication and review (an administrative requirement only — this is not required by law) ▪ assessment or amended assessment, and ▪ litigation. The disputes procedures envisage that the final step in the process is the issue of an amended assessment. Previously, under the objection and case stated procedures, further dialogue and consideration normally followed the issue of an amended assessment.  The disputes resolution procedures are designed to settle arguments over the correctness of an assessment or amended assessment before it is issued. This is intended to reduce potential litigation, remove unnecessary compliance costs and secure prompt and equitable resolution of disputes. The dispute resolution process is not changed by taxpayer selfassessment. Law: TAA Pts 4A, 8A  ¶4-125 Summary of Commissioner- and taxpayerinitiated disputes processes The disputes resolution process can be initiated by either the Commissioner (see ¶4-130) or the taxpayer (see ¶4-135) issuing a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA). Such notice requires the relevant party to inform the respondent of any proposed adjustments to a person’s tax position and to state the reasons for those adjustments. Inland Revenue (IR) has issued standard practice statements on the disputes resolution process that apply from 10 October 2016: ▪ standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue”, and ▪ standard practice statement SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”. Both SPS 16/05 and SPS 16/06 include a table of indicative administrative time frames for the disputes resolution process. They are both published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016. Struck-off companies A company that is no longer registered on the Register of Companies cannot be a party to any disputes resolution procedure  unless and until that company is reinstated to the register. This is because the company no longer exists once it is struck off the register. A company that is restored to the register may be deemed to have continued in existence as if it had not been removed from the register. However, it does not follow that the company continues to have some form of status after its removal. See Case W13 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,134 and Case X3 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,063. Summary of processes The steps involved in the disputes resolution process are summarised in the following diagrams. Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue  Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer  NOTICES OF PROPOSED ADJUSTMENT AND RESPONSE ¶4-130 Notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) issued by Commissioner Tax disputes are formally initiated by a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA). Such notice requires the relevant party to inform the respondent of any proposed adjustments to a person’s tax position and to state the reasons for those adjustments. Usually a NOPA is issued by the Commissioner after completing the audit of a taxpayer’s affairs. Generally, the Commissioner will not issue an assessment until after the disputes procedure has been concluded. However, in a limited number of situations, the Commissioner may issue an assessment without first issuing a NOPA. Those situations are outlined at ¶4-145. Sometimes Inland Revenue may discover an item that needs to be adjusted but is unable to issue a NOPA. This would occur when the proposed adjustment is already subject to a challenge or when the statutory time bar has expired. See ¶4-165. The Commissioner may issue one or more NOPAs in respect of a tax return or an assessment. If an audit spans several years and the time bar is pending, it is possible for the Commissioner to issue one notice that covers more than one return period, issue and tax type to ensure that the assessment can still be issued within the time bar period. Law: TAA s 89B  ¶4-135 Notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) issued by taxpayer The taxpayer is able to initiate the dispute resolution procedure by issuing a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) to the  Commissioner in certain circumstances. The taxpayer (or his or her agent) is able to issue a NOPA to the Commissioner: ▪ within four months of the date of an assessment made by the Commissioner ▪ within four months of the date on which the taxpayer’s notice of assessment is received at an Inland Revenue office for an assessment made by the taxpayer (and provided that the Commissioner has not already issued a NOPA to the taxpayer in respect of that assessment) ▪ within four months of the date of a disputable decision if the Commissioner issues a notice of disputable decision (not being a notice of assessment) that affects the taxpayer. ▸Note: There is arguably a loophole in the current disputes procedures that allows a taxpayer to circumvent the time limit for challenging an assessment. This involves the taxpayer making a voluntary disclosure for a particular item, which arguably could allow them to reopen the entire original assessment, circumventing the time limit. The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to close this potential loophole with effect from the day the Bill is enacted. Returns to be furnished If a taxpayer has not filed an income tax or GST return for an assessment period, but wishes to dispute an assessment made by the Commissioner for that period, a return must first be filed for that assessment period: C of IR v Taxation Review Authority (2004) 21 NZTC 18,707. The High Court held that s 89D(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) makes a taxpayer’s right to issue a NOPA dependent on the taxpayer first satisfying the taxpayer’s statutory obligation to file a tax return. That requirement is an additional requirement of the disputes procedures in which a default assessment is involved. To be valid, a NOPA must be issued within  two months of the date of the assessment. This time limit is not affected by the requirement for the taxpayer to file a tax return. Also see Case W16 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,156 and C of IR v Taxation Review Authority (2004) 21 NZTC 18,634 at ¶4-225. With effect from 1 April 2019, when the Commissioner makes a default assessment for an individual because she is not satisfied the income information in their pre-populated account is correct, the individual may dispute the assessment only by making an adjustment to their final account. However, if the Commissioner makes a default assessment under s 106(1A) of the TAA because she considers the information provided in an individual’s final account is not likely to be correct, the individual may only dispute the assessment under the disputes procedure. Despite its transparency and the fact that there is no assessment of the company, a look-through company (LTC) may issue a NOPA in respect of a return the company has made if the Commissioner has not previously issued a NOPA in respect of the same return. Law: TAA ss 89AB, 89C, 89D, 89DA  ¶4-140 Form and content of notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) The notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) must be in the prescribed form (form IR 770) and must also contain sufficient detail of certain matters to identify the issues arising between the Commissioner and the disputant. For a NOPA issued by the Commissioner, there must be sufficient detail to: ▪ identify the adjustment or adjustments proposed to be made to the assessment ▪ provide a concise statement of the key facts and the law to advise the disputant of the grounds for the proposed adjustment or adjustments, and  ▪ state how the law applies to the facts. For a NOPA issued by a disputant, there must be sufficient detail to: ▪ identify the adjustment or adjustments proposed to be made to the assessment ▪ provide a statement of the facts and the law in sufficient detail to advise the Commissioner of the grounds for the proposed adjustment or adjustments, and ▪ state how the law applies to the facts. Copies of the documents that are significantly relevant to the issues arising in the dispute of which the disputant is aware at the time that the NOPA is issued are also required. Law: TAA s 89F  ¶4-145 Commissioner not required to issue notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) In some limited circumstances, the Commissioner can make an assessment of a taxpayer’s tax position without initiating the dispute resolution process (ie without issuing a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA)). Those circumstances are: ▪ the assessment corresponds with a tax return that has been provided by the taxpayer: see s 89C(a) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 ▪ the taxpayer has provided a tax return that, in the Commissioner’s opinion, contains a simple or obvious mistake or oversight, and the assessment merely corrects the mistake or oversight: see s 89C(b) ▪ the assessment corrects a tax position previously taken by the taxpayer in a way or manner agreed by the Commissioner and the taxpayer: see s 89C(c)  ▪ the assessment reflects an agreement reached between the Commissioner and the taxpayer: see s 89C(d) ▪ the assessment is made in relation to a matter for which the material facts and the relevant law are identical to an assessment of the taxpayer for another period that is at the time the subject of court proceedings: see s 89C(db) ▪ the Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe a notice may cause the taxpayer or associate to either: □ leave New Zealand, or □ take steps to remove assets from New Zealand, thus making it harder for the Commissioner to collect the tax: see s 89C(e)(i), (ii) ▪ the Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that the taxpayer has been involved in fraudulent activity: see s 89C(eb) ▪ the assessment corrects a tax position previously taken by the taxpayer which is, in the Commissioner’s opinion, the result of a vexatious or frivolous act or failure to act by the taxpayer: see s 89C(f) ▪ the assessment is made as a result of a direction or determination by a court or the Taxation Review Authority: see s 89C(g) ▪ the taxpayer has not provided a tax return as required by law: see s 89C(h) ▪ the assessment is made following the failure by a taxpayer to make a deduction required to be made by a tax law or to account for a deduction in the manner required by a tax law: see s 89C(i)  ▪ the taxpayer is entitled to issue a NOPA in respect of a tax return provided by the taxpayer and has done so: see s 89C(j) ▪ the assessment corrects a tax position taken by the taxpayer or an associate as a consequence or result of an incorrect tax position taken by another taxpayer and, at the time the Commissioner makes an assessment, the Commissioner has made or is able to make an assessment to that other taxpayer for the correct amount of tax payable by that other taxpayer: see s 89C(k) ▪ the assessment corrects a tax position taken by a taxpayer in relation to a tax position taken by an LTC in a return of income by that company, and the disputes resolution process has been completed in respect of that return and that tax position: see s 89C(ka) ▪ the assessment results from an amendment made to a qualifying individual’s final account under s 22G(6): see s 89C(l) ▪ the Commissioner is making an amendment before finalising a qualifying individual’s account under s 22H: see s 89C(lbaa) ▪ the assessment is of a penalty under s 142H or 142I: see s 89C(lba) ▪ the assessment extinguishes all or part of the taxpayer’s tax loss in accordance with the Commissioner’s power to write-off tax: see s 89C(lb), or ▪ the assessment includes a calculation, by the Commissioner, of a WFF tax credit: see s 89C(m). Law: TAA s 89C  ¶4-150 Action on receipt of notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA)  The recipient of a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) has three possible courses of action. The recipient may: ▪ accept the proposed adjustments (see ¶4-155) ▪ reject the adjustments (see ¶4-160), or ▪ do nothing (see ¶4-155).  ¶4-155 Acceptance of notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) A taxpayer accepts a proposed adjustment set out by the Commissioner in a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) either by notifying the Commissioner they accept or by doing nothing and allowing the two-month response period to lapse. Once the assessment has been accepted, it may not be challenged in the Taxation Review Authority or the High Court. Inland Revenue advises that assessments are likely to be issued sooner if acceptance of a NOPA is notified, rather than allowing for deemed acceptance. Early acceptance will also ensure that any use of money interest or shortfall penalty is pegged at an earlier date. If the Commissioner fails to issue a challenge notice within four years of a taxpayer issuing a NOPA, the Commissioner is deemed to have accepted the taxpayer’s NOPA or SOP and must issue an amended assessment. Law: TAA ss 89H, 89I  ¶4-160 Rejection of notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) — notice of response (NOR) A recipient of a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) who does not agree with the proposed adjustment and wishes to contest it must issue a notice of response (NOR) (form IR 771) to the relevant party within two months from the date of issue of the NOPA. If several NOPAs have been issued on different dates, a single NOR can be  used, but it must be issued within two months of the issue of the first NOPA. A NOR must state concisely: ▪ the facts or legal arguments in the NOPA that the issuer of the NOR considers are wrong ▪ why the issuer of the NOR considers those facts or legal arguments to be wrong ▪ any facts and legal arguments relied on by the issuer of the NOR ▪ how the legal arguments apply to the facts, and ▪ the quantitative adjustments to any figure referred to in the NOPA that result from the facts and legal arguments relied on by the issuer of the NOR. If the NOR does not contain the requisite information, it will be invalid. In such cases, the Commissioner will, as soon as practicable, notify the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent of the deficiencies in the NOR and the expiry date of the response period. See standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 14 at [122]– [129]. If the response period has expired, the only avenue open to the taxpayer is to seek to file a late NOR on the ground of exceptional circumstances. See ¶4-165. In cases in which the NOPA has been initiated by the taxpayer and the Commissioner does not respond in the two-month period, the Commissioner is deemed to have accepted the NOPA and must include that adjustment in any notice of assessment or amended assessments sent to the taxpayer. However, the Commissioner is not required to include the adjustment if the Commissioner considers that the taxpayer was fraudulent or wilfully misled the Commissioner. When a taxpayer is late in issuing a NOPA or a statement of position, the Commissioner’s response period starts from the time  when it is decided “exceptional circumstances” exist and the taxpayer’s late document is to be allowed. This ensures the Commissioner is not required to issue a substantive response to a dispute that may not have a procedural basis while a decision is still being reached. The Commissioner may apply to the High Court for an extension of time to issue a NOR if exceptional circumstances apply and application is made before an assessment including the adjustment is issued. See ¶4-165. SPS 16/05 provides some guidance as to how Inland Revenue views the legislative requirements for NORs (see [90]–[95] of the statement). Where a taxpayer initiates the dispute and where the Commissioner fails to issue a challenge notice within the four-year time frame, the Commissioner is deemed to have accepted the taxpayer’s NOPA even if the Commissioner’s NOR was issued in time. Law: TAA ss 89AB, 89AC, 89G, 89H, 89J  ¶4-165 Time limits for disputes documents — exceptional circumstances Taxpayer outside time limit for NOPA If an exceptional circumstance has prevented a taxpayer from responding to a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) within the two-month time period, the Commissioner may accept a late notice of response (NOR). The effect is that the taxpayer’s rejection of the Commissioner’s NOPA is treated for all purposes under Pt 4A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 as if it had been made within the statutory response period. Exceptional circumstances may also be considered in relation to the late filing of a statement of position or a NOPA in respect of a self-assessment. For these purposes an exceptional circumstance is defined as an event or circumstance outside the taxpayer’s control that provides reasonable justification for not responding within the response  period. An act or omission of an agent is not an exceptional circumstance unless the act or omission was caused by an event or circumstance beyond the agent’s control that could not have been anticipated and could not have been avoided if accepted standards of business organisation and professional conduct had been maintained. An exceptional circumstance includes the situation in which a taxpayer or agent is late in issuing a NOPA, NOR or statement of position, but the Commissioner considers that the lateness is minimal or results from one or more statutory holidays falling in the response period. The Commissioner may also accept a late notice or statement of position if she considers the taxpayer has a demonstrable intention to enter into or continue the disputes resolution process at the relevant time. Any request for consideration of a late NOR, NOPA or statement of position must be in writing and must include: ▪ a full explanation as to why the NOR, NOPA or statement of position is late, together with any supporting evidence, and ▪ the NOR, NOPA or statement of position that the Commissioner would have received had it been issued on time. Example: The taxpayers had a long-standing dispute with the Commissioner concerning the correct assessment of income tax to be deducted from superannuitants who derived pensions from the United Kingdom. The Commissioner disallowed the taxpayers’ selfassessments and the taxpayers issued NOPAs. The Commissioner rejected the proposed adjustments, and the taxpayers gave notice that they did not accept the Commissioner’s rejection. The taxpayers exercised their right to have the matter decided by the Taxation Review Authority by sending the Commissioner a notice of claim. The taxpayers had, however, neglected to file the notice of claim with the Registrar of the Taxation Review Authority before the time limit expired. The taxpayers applied for leave from the Authority to commence a challenge out of time. The Authority refused, as the taxpayers were unable to establish that their failure to file a notice of claim in time was an “exceptional circumstance”. See Case V1 (2001) 20 NZTC 10,001.  Standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue”, sets out Inland Revenue’s (IR) interpretation of “exceptional circumstance” at [98]–[121] of the statement (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 14). The concept is also discussed in standard practice statement SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”, at [106]–[123] of that statement (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 50). If the Commissioner does not exercise the discretion to accept a late document, the Commissioner must issue a refusal notice within one month of the taxpayer’s notice being sent. If the Commissioner fails to issue a notice then such a notice is deemed to have been sent at the end of one month, if it has not actually been sent. Receipt of this notice, or a deemed notice, allows the taxpayer the right to challenge the notice in the TRA within two months of the notice’s issue. The statutory time bars are extended to include this period between the date of the refusal notice and the date the subsequent challenge is judged successful by a court, or when the Commissioner concedes. When a taxpayer is late in issuing a NOPA or a statement of position, the Commissioner’s response period starts from the time when it is decided “exceptional circumstances” exist and the taxpayer’s late document is to be allowed. This ensures the Commissioner is not required to issue a substantive response to a dispute that may not have a procedural basis while a decision is still being reached. Commissioner outside time limit for NOPA If an exceptional circumstance has prevented the Commissioner from rejecting a taxpayer’s NOPA within the two-month response period, the Commissioner can apply to the High Court for an order allowing the Commissioner to respond outside the time limit. An exceptional circumstance is defined for these purposes as an event or circumstance beyond the Commissioner’s or other IR officer’s control that is justification for not rejecting a NOPA within the response period.  Preserving fair trial rights under New Zealand Bill of Rights is exceptional circumstance In July 2020, the Commissioner identified that there are a number of provisions in the disputes resolution procedure that may potentially be in conflict with a taxpayer’s fair trial rights under the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990. In response, Inland Revenue issued a Commissioner’s statement, CS 20/04, “The disputes resolution process and fair trial rights” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 8, September 2020 at 15), which sets out the broad approach the Commissioner is taking to preserve a taxpayer’s fair trial rights in criminal proceedings when there is a contemporaneous civil dispute. A taxpayer will be advised when criminal proceedings have commenced, or are contemplated, before the taxpayer is required to commence or continue the disputes process. The Commissioner considers that preserving a taxpayer’s rights in current or potential criminal proceedings is an “exceptional circumstance” under s 89K. A taxpayer, therefore, may elect not to file an outstanding disputes document until the question of prosecution has been determined. This may prevent the commencement of, or pause, the disputes process. The Commissioner will notify the taxpayer once the issue of prosecution has been determined, at which time the dispute can commence or resume. The taxpayer will then have to issue their outstanding dispute document by the later of two months from this notification or the original due date for the dispute document. An alternative is for the parties to agree to pause the dispute at the conference stage while the matter of prosecution is resolved. The taxpayer may also choose to voluntarily take part in the disputes resolution process, despite the prosecution or contemplated prosecution. Debt recovery steps will not be taken by Inland Revenue if the disputes process has been halted, unless the Commissioner considers there is a significant risk the debt will not be paid. This will only be relevant if an assessment has been issued by the Commissioner.  Halting the disputes process may impact on the time bar. In that case, options are available to ensure that the appropriate steps are taken before the time bar expires, eg the taxpayer can agree to waive the time bar, or the Commissioner can apply to the High Court for an extension. Commissioner outside time limit for challenge notice The Commissioner may apply to the High Court for an order allowing the Commissioner to issue a challenge notice after the statutory fouryear period (see ¶4-192) if: ▪ the Commissioner considers that an exceptional circumstance applies or has prevented the Commissioner from issuing the challenge notice within the four years, and ▪ the Commissioner applies within four years. An “exceptional circumstance” for the purposes of the application is an event or circumstance beyond the control of the Commissioner or an IR officer that provides the Commissioner with a reasonable justification for not rejecting the adjustment within the response period. The preservation of a taxpayer’s right to a fair trial was accepted as an exceptional circumstance under s 89L permitting the Commissioner to issue a challenge notice outside the four-year time period in Commissioner of Inland Revenue v Faghriyar (2020) 29 NZTC 24-067. The High Court may either make an order as it sees fit or decline to make an order. Taxpayer outside time limit for filing challenge proceedings If an exceptional circumstance has prevented a taxpayer from commencing challenge proceedings within two months of an assessment being issued, the High Court or Taxation Review Authority may allow a late challenge. See further at ¶4-225. Law: TAA ss 89AB, 89AC, 89K, 89L  ¶4-170 Action on receipt of notice of response Commissioner-initiated procedure After considering the merits of a notice of response (NOR), the Commissioner will do one of the following: ▪ Accept the NOR in full and make any appropriate adjustments. ▪ Accept the NOR in part and advise the taxpayer of those issues that have been accepted. The remainder of the issues will progress to the conference phase. ▪ Reject the NOR in full and advise the taxpayer or agent of the rejection. The issue will progress to the conference stage. Taxpayer-initiated procedure If the NOR was issued by the Commissioner (ie the taxpayer initiated the dispute procedure) and the taxpayer disagrees with the NOR, the taxpayer notify the Commissioner within the response period (ie within two months of the date of the Commissioner’s NOR), rejecting all or part of the Commissioner’s notice. The matter will then progress to the conference stage. Failure to notify the Commissioner of the rejection will result in deemed acceptance of the matters in the Commissioner’s notice. See s 89H(3) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Law: TAA s 89H(3)  CONFERENCE STAGE ¶4-175 Purpose of conference stage If matters remain in dispute after the filing of the notice of proposed adjustment and the notice of response, parties are generally required to attend a conference (with their legal representatives) to discuss, clarify and try to resolve the differences in their understanding of the various facts and issues. The conference phase is an administrative  practice and is not mandatory. However, it is encouraged as a means for resolving disputes, where possible, without the need to proceed to adjudication. See further in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016, SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue”, at [130]–[161] and SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”, at [159]–[190].  ¶4-177 Conference facilitation Conference facilitation is offered to all taxpayers by Inland Revenue (IR) as part of the conference stage of the disputes resolution process. The offer is made in writing within one month from the date of issue of the taxpayer’ notice of response (NOR), or the taxpayer’s rejection of the Commissioner’s NOR (whichever is applicable). An independent internal facilitator is a person who promotes and encourages structured discussion between IR officers and the taxpayer on an informed basis and with a bona fide intention of resolving the dispute. The facilitator is a senior IR officer, with sufficient technical knowledge, who has not been involved in the dispute or given advice on the dispute prior to the conference stage. The conference facilitator is not responsible for making any decision in respect of the dispute (or settlement), but rather facilitates the discussion and resolution of difference, and ultimately determines when the conference phase has come to an end. Facilitation is optional and a conference can be held without a facilitator. See standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue”, [135]–[161], and standard practice statement SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”, [164]–[190], Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016.  ¶4-179 Opting out of the disputes resolution process The Commissioner and a taxpayer can agree, recording their agreement in a document, to opt out of the disputes resolution  process if they are satisfied that it would be more efficient to have the dispute heard by a court or the TRA. The Commissioner will not agree to truncation of the disputes resolution process without a conference having been held and the taxpayer must have participated meaningfully during this administrative phase. For a request to opt out to be successful, the taxpayer must have: ▪ provided all information requested by the Commissioner, and ▪ discussed the contentious facts and issues of the dispute with the Commissioner. The Commissioner will agree to the request, if the above steps have been taken and one of the following applies: ▪ the total amount of tax in disputes is $75,000 or less ▪ the dispute turns on issues of fact only ▪ the dispute concerns facts and issues that are waiting to be resolved by a court, or ▪ the dispute concerns facts and issues that are similar to those considered by the Disputes Review Unit if similar issues have been considered in a dispute in the past. Even if the dispute does not fall into one of the categories above the Commissioner may still agree to opt out of the disputes resolution process if it is considered that a court or the TRA can deal with the dispute more efficiently. A taxpayer’s request to opt out must be submitted within two weeks of the end of the conference stage and the Commissioner will advise the taxpayer within two weeks from the date of request whether the request has been agreed to or not. In agreeing to truncate the process, the Commissioner must issue a challenge notice. See ¶4192. For more detail see standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of  Inland Revenue”, [162]–[185], and standard practice statement SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”, [191]–[218], Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016. Law: TAA s 89N(1)(c)(viii)  DISCLOSURE ¶4-180 Aim of disclosure stage If the dispute remains unresolved after the conference (and the parties have not opted out of the disputes process), the parties proceed to disclosure. This process aims to allow the taxpayer and Commissioner to lay all their cards on the table and delineate the nature and scope of the dispute. To encourage this aim, any future litigation is generally limited to the evidence and legal arguments that are disclosed in the statements of position. See ¶4-190.  ¶4-185 Disclosure notice Except in the cases in which the Commissioner is not required to complete the disputes resolution process (see ¶4-179), the Commissioner must issue a disclosure notice in respect of a NOPA to a disputant at the time, or after the Commissioner or the taxpayer, as the case may be, issues the NOPA. However, the Commissioner may not issue a disclosure notice in respect of a NOPA if he has already issued a disputable decision (ie an assessment or decision subject to objection or challenge) that includes, or takes account of, the adjustment proposed in the NOPA. Unless the disputant has issued a NOPA, the Commissioner must, when issuing a disclosure notice: ▪ provide Inland Revenue’s statement of position, and ▪ expressly refer to the evidence exclusion rule under s 138G of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and its potential effect (see ¶4190).  Each party’s statement of position will be on a prescribed form (form IR 773) and must give sufficient detail to fairly advise the other of an outline of the facts, the evidence, the issue and the proposition of law relied on by the party. The term “evidence” refers to the available documentary evidence on which the person intends to rely. The term does not include a list of potential witnesses. Note that the Taxation Review Authority (TRA) has confirmed that no timeframe is specified within which the disclosure notice has to be issued and that the TRA does not have the power to direct that the Commissioner must issue one. See Case 23/2015 (2015) 27 NZTC ¶3-022. Disputant’s response period If the Commissioner issues a disclosure notice to a disputant, the disputant must issue the Commissioner with his or her statement of position within two months of the date of issue of the Commissioner’s disclosure notice. If the taxpayer’s statement of position does not contain the requisite information and the response period has expired, the taxpayer is treated: ▪ as having accepted the Commissioner’s NOPA or statement of position, if the Commissioner has proposed the adjustment, or ▪ as not having issued a NOPA, if the disputant has proposed the adjustment. An assessment will then be issued. If there is still time available in the response period, the taxpayer will be able to issue a valid taxpayer statement of position. If an extension of time is needed, the disputant may apply to the High Court for an extension of time in accordance with s 89M(11). See Chapman v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,474. Commissioner’s right of reply The Commissioner has the right to reply to the taxpayer’s statement of position with additional information. If the Commissioner exercises  that right of reply, he must do so within two months of the date of issue of the taxpayer’s statement of position. See s 89M(8). In C of IR v Delphi Fishing Co Ltd (2004) 21 NZTC 18,525, the High Court held that any additional information provided by the Commissioner under s 89M(8) must be in response to the taxpayer’s material. The additional information can be facts or evidence that the Commissioner intends to rely on, issues that the Commissioner considers will arise or propositions of law that the Commissioner intends to rely on in the disputes process. After a taxpayer has issued a statement of position, the Commissioner is not required to issue a statement of position if any of the situations set out in s 89N(1)(c) apply. In effect, the Commissioner is not required to issue a statement of position for a truncated dispute when the dispute is taxpayer initiated and the taxpayer has issued a statement of position. See s 89M(6BA). See also ¶4-190. If the Commissioner requires more time to reply to the disputant’s statement of position, the Commissioner may apply to the High Court under s 89M(10). Parties may agree to accept additional information The Commissioner and a disputant may agree to additional information being added, at any time, to either of their statements of position. The additional information provided by the Commissioner or a disputant is deemed to form part of the provider’s statement of position. Law: TAA s 89M  ¶4-190 Evidence exclusion rule The evidence exclusion rule has been relaxed so that parties are now only limited to the issues and propositions of law. Previously, they were limited in any challenge to the facts, evidence, issues and propositions of law disclosed in their statements of position.  Once a disclosure notice has been given and the parties have completed their statements of position, the evidence exclusion rule applies. Under this rule, both the taxpayer and the Commissioner are limited in any challenge to the issues and propositions of law disclosed in their statements of position. See Case W31 (2004) 21 NZTC 11,311 for illustration of the rule. The Court of Appeal suggested that there is no comparable rule applying to parties earlier in the dispute resolution process. See C of IR v Zentrum Holdings Ltd (2006) 22 NZTC 19,912 (CA). However, the evidence exclusion rule does not restrict the parties to matters raised in their own statements of position. If they were so restricted, neither party would be able to respond to the other party’s statement of position because neither could rely on legal propositions raised by the other party. See C of IR v Delphi Fishing Co Ltd (2004) 21 NZTC 18,525 at 18,533. The evidence exclusion rule is subject to judicial discretion to admit previously undisclosed matters. The applicant must show that he or she could not, with due diligence, have found or discovered this material at the time of discovery of his or her statement of position and that admission of those items is necessary to avoid manifest injustice. See Case X22 (2006) 22 NZTC 12,278. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 20 for a discussion on the amended evidence exclusion rule. Where, in a taxpayer-initiated dispute, the parties have agreed to submit the dispute to a court or Taxation Review Authority without requiring the Commissioner to submit a statement of position (under s 89N(1)(c)(viii)), the taxpayer is bound by the evidence exclusion rule but the Commissioner is not. This ensures the Commissioner can rely on information that would otherwise have been included in her statement of position. However, where the Commissioner has not been required to submit a statement of position under any of the other sub-paragraphs of s 89N(1)(c), neither the Commissioner nor the taxpayer are bound by the evidence exclusion rule. See also ¶4185. Law: TAA s 138G  ¶4-192 The Commissioner’s challenge notice Where a taxpayer has initiated the dispute, the Commissioner must issue a challenge notice within four years of the taxpayer issuing its NOPA. Generally, the challenge notice can only be issued after the Commissioner has issued a SOP. The challenge notice forms the basis for the subsequent challenge in the courts. It marks the conclusion of the taxpayer-initiated dispute. A challenge notice must state that: ▪ the Commissioner will not be issuing an amended assessment that includes or takes into account the adjustment proposed by the taxpayer, and ▪ a challenge may proceed. A challenge notice is not required where the Commissioner has accepted a taxpayer's NOPA if the Commissioner considers the taxpayer was fraudulent or wilfully misled the Commissioner in relation to the adjustment. If the Commissioner has failed to issue a challenge notice in time and exceptional circumstances exist, the Commissioner may make an application to the High Court to issue a late notice. See ¶4-165. Law: TAA s 89P  ADJUDICATION ¶4-195 Introduction to the Disputes Review Unit Disputes that are not resolved during the pre-assessment phase are subject to review and adjudication by Inland Revenue’s (IR) Disputes Review Unit. The Disputes Review Unit is part of the Tax Counsel Office (prior to 17 February 2020, the Office of the Chief Tax Counsel). The adjudicator is an impartial IR officer who is independent of the audit function.  Not every case will be sent to adjudication. Sometimes the Commissioner may issue an assessment before the adjudication process can be utilised.  ¶4-200 Filing requirements for disputes review On completion of the pre-adjudication disputes resolution process, the following documents must be filed with Inland Revenue (IR): ▪ notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) ▪ notice of response (NOR) ▪ notice rejecting the NOR (if applicable) ▪ conference notes ▪ the taxpayer’s statement of position ▪ the Commissioner’s statement of position, and ▪ any relevant documentary evidence (for example, expert opinions, specialist advice obtained) and a schedule of all evidence held. The IR officer will attach a cover sheet to the documents that will be sent to the Disputes Review Unit (DRU). A copy of the cover sheet will be sent to the taxpayer or agent together with a letter asking for the taxpayer’s agreement on the material to be sent to the DRU. Taxpayers will be given 10 working days to respond, after which the file will be given to the DRU. The DRU will endeavour to determine the outcome of the case within three months from the date of receipt of the file, subject to the facts and complexity of the case. See standard practice statement SPS 16/05, “Disputes resolution process commenced by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue”, [252]–[264], and standard practice statement SPS 16/06, “Disputes resolution process commenced by a taxpayer”, [275]–[290], Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016.  IR’s performance standards require the DRU to complete low complexity disputes in an average of eight weeks, medium complexity disputes in an average of 14 weeks and high complexity disputes in an average of 20 weeks. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 10, November 2007 at 10.  ¶4-202 Communications received by the disputes review unit Inland Revenue has released a Question we’ve been asked, “Managing communications associated with a dispute referred to the adjudication unit” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 12, December 2003 at 62). This item sets out how the Disputes Review Unit (DRU) (then the adjudication unit) deals with communications it receives in the disputes resolution process. Briefly, there are two guiding principles that the unit seeks to abide by: ▪ openness and transparency, and ▪ maintaining the independence of the unit. These two principles effectively require that the parties to a dispute are aware of the reasons for the unit’s decision and what has influenced the unit in coming to that decision. Communications generated by the DRU itself will generally be signed by the Tax Counsel Office’s field liaison and communication unit and copied to both parties to the dispute. Communications of this type usually arise because the DRU needs information to progress its consideration of a case. Communications generated by the parties to the dispute will be answered in the first instance by the Tax Counsel Office’s field liaison and communication unit if the matter is of a general or procedural nature. The adjudication team working on the case will not usually see this correspondence, so it will not be copied to the parties to the dispute.  All communications that are passed on to the adjudication team working on the dispute will be copied to both parties to the dispute. Any claim of legal professional privilege made on a communication received by the DRU will be considered and determined by the unit before any copy of the communication is sent to the other party.  ¶4-205 Decision of the disputes review unit The Inland Revenue officer in charge of the dispute is advised of the decision of the Disputes Review Unit (DRU). If the decision is in favour of the Commissioner, the officer will do what is required to give effect to the decision, including issuing a notice of assessment. If the decision is against the Commissioner, the dispute resolution process comes to an end. The Commissioner has no right of challenge. If the decision made by the DRU is against the taxpayer, the taxpayer may challenge it. The taxpayer may file proceedings in the Taxation Review Authority or in the High Court. If the dispute resolution process was commenced by the taxpayer, proceedings may be filed by the taxpayer in the following circumstances: ▪ the assessment was the subject of an adjustment proposed by the taxpayer that the Commissioner has rejected, or ▪ the assessment was subject to a NOPA issued by the taxpayer, that the Commissioner has rejected, and the Commissioner has issued a challenge notice. This defers the commencement of challenge proceedings as the challenge notice can only generally be issued after the Commissioner has issued a SOP, or ▪ the Commissioner or taxpayer has issued an assessment that is the subject of an adjustment notified to the Commissioner, where:  □ the adjustment relates to a matter for which the material facts and relevant law are identical to another assessment, for a different period, for the taxpayer which are subject to court proceedings, or □ the adjustment corrects a tax position taken by the taxpayer, or a person associated with the taxpayer, as a consequence of an incorrect tax position taken by another taxpayer, which is or was subject to court proceedings, and □ the Commissioner has issued a challenge notice. See ¶4192, or ▪ a disputable decision, not being an assessment, was the subject of an adjustment proposed by the taxpayer that the Commissioner has rejected. If the dispute resolution process was commenced by the Commissioner, proceedings may be filed by the taxpayer if the assessment includes an adjustment proposed by the Commissioner, which the taxpayer has rejected within two months of the date of the notice of proposed adjustment. Proceedings may also be filed by the taxpayer if the assessment meets the following criteria: ▪ it is an amended assessment, and ▪ a fresh liability is imposed or an existing liability is increased. The taxpayer must file proceedings with the Taxation Review Authority or the High Court within two months from the date the assessment is issued after the adjudication process. This time limit applies to all disputes, whether commenced by the taxpayer or the Commissioner.  CHALLENGE ¶4-215 Application of challenge procedure  The challenge procedure applies to: ▪ every notice of disputable decision issued by the Commissioner under a provision of the Inland Revenue Acts on or after 1 October 1996, irrespective of the period to which the notice relates, and ▪ any assessment, reassessment or determination issued before 1 October 1996 that was elected to be treated as if issued after that date, irrespective of the period to which the assessment or reassessment relates: see s 125A(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The procedure does not apply to any assessment, reassessment or determination or decision to which Pt 8 of the Tax Administration Act applies (objections). Law: TAA s 138A  ¶4-220 Summary of challenge process The following diagram, reproduced from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 3, August 1996 at 8, shows the procedure usually followed when the taxpayer wishes to pursue an assessment or determination before a court.  Note that from 1 April 2005, the Commissioner is generally required to issue a disclosure notice: see ¶4-185. Note that from 29 August 2011, the small claims jurisdiction was abolished.  ¶4-225 Commencing challenge proceedings A taxpayer who disagrees with an assessment issued following the disputes process may challenge that decision by filing proceedings with the Taxation Review Authority (TRA) or the High Court, provided that: ▪ The assessment includes an adjustment proposed by the Commissioner that the taxpayer, or the taxpayer’s look-through company (LTC), has rejected within the two-month response period or was the subject of an adjustment proposed by the taxpayer that the Commissioner has rejected within the response period. ▪ The proceedings are filed with the TRA or the High Court within two months of the date of assessment or determination. If the taxpayer issued a NOPA and the Commissioner decided not to amend the assessment, proceedings must be issued within two months of the date that the taxpayer was notified of the decision. The beginning of the two-month period in which the taxpayer must file proceedings is not limited to the date of the Commissioner’s notice of response. A disputant is also entitled to challenge a disputable decision that is not an assessment by commencing proceedings in the TRA or the High Court if: ▪ the disputable decision was the subject of an adjustment proposed by the disputant that the Commissioner has rejected, and ▪ proceedings are filed within the two-month response period for the notice from the Commissioner rejecting the proposed  adjustment. Non-disputable decisions Not all decisions taken by the Commissioner are disputable decisions and subject to challenge. A decision to apply one of the exceptions to the time bar provisions and “re-open” tax assessments is not a disputable decision in the absence of an assessment by the Commissioner: Vinelight Nominees Ltd v CIR (No 2) (2005) 22 NZTC 19,519 (HC). Other decisions that are not disputable decisions are decisions: ▪ to decline to issue a binding ruling ▪ that cannot be the subject of an objection or a challenge ▪ to issue a Commissioner’s NOPA under s 89B, a Commissioner’s disclosure notice or statement of position under s 89M, or a challenge notice ▪ to issue, or to decline to issue, a Commissioner’s COVID-19 response variation under s 6I ▪ to grant, or to decline to grant, a loan under the small business cashflow scheme under s 7AA, or ▪ to make, or decline to make, a grant under the COVID-19 resurgence support payments scheme under s 7AAB. In Case W16 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,156, the Commissioner argued that the taxpayer had failed to comply with s 138B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) by not giving the Commissioner a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) within the two-month period required. The Authority rejected this argument, and the Commissioner applied for a judicial review of the TRA decision in C of IR v Taxation Review Authority (2004) 21 NZTC 18,634. The High Court held:  ▪ an exchange of a NOPA and a notice of response was essential to achieving the purposes of the dispute resolution process (this had to be done before a taxpayer could bring a challenge proceeding) ▪ the wording of s 138B(1) suggests that an adjustment proposed and rejected before the issuing of an assessment is a separate and tentative step, and ▪ it is the assessment, once dispute rights are exhausted or have expired, which is final. In Case X2 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,056 the TRA held that a taxpayer could not proceed with challenge proceedings because the taxpayer’s notice of proposed adjustment was filed out of time. Further, the Authority agreed with the Commissioner that, with the introduction of self-assessment, the response period was triggered by the taxpayer’s own self-assessment. In C of IR v Taxation Review Authority (2004) 21 NZTC 18,707, the High Court held that s 138B applies to default assessments. If this were not the case, a defaulting taxpayer would be placed at an advantage over other taxpayers who had filed a return. This decision was affirmed in the Court of Appeal in Allen v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,473 (CA). The Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the High Court and noted that there was no general obligation to dispute an assessment. However, if a taxpayer wished to dispute an assessment, the disputes procedures must be complied with and that involved the filing of a return and the issuing of a NOPA. See Allen v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,827 (SC). In C of IR v Zentrum Holdings Ltd (2006) 22 NZTC 19,912 the Court of Appeal held that, where no disclosure notice has been issued, there was no rule expressly limiting an objector on appeal to the grounds stated in the objection. However, where a disclosure notice has been issued and the taxpayer subsequently challenges the assessment, the matters in issue are limited to the legal and factual matters identified in the statements of position, but all of those issues are legitimate matters of dispute in the challenge proceedings. In  Beckham v C of IR (2007) 23 NZTC 21,499, it was held that the Taxation Review Authority could assess an appellant on different grounds to those on which a challenged assessment was based, as the different grounds formed part of the “subject matter” of the disputable decision being challenged. Exceptional circumstances If the Taxation Review Authority or the High Court considers that exceptional circumstances have prevented a taxpayer or his or her agent from issuing proceedings within the two-month period, the taxpayer or agent will be allowed to start a challenge. An exceptional circumstance is defined as an event or circumstance beyond the taxpayer’s control that provides the taxpayer with a reasonable justification for not complying with the time limit. An act or omission of the taxpayer’s agent is not an exceptional circumstance unless it was caused by events beyond the agent’s control that could not be anticipated, and the effect of which could not have been avoided if the accepted standards of business organisation and professional conduct were followed. Example 1: The taxpayer’s application for leave to commence proceedings five months out of time because of a misunderstanding and erroneous assumption by the taxpayer’s agent was held not to constitute “exceptional circumstances” that were “beyond the control of the applicant” in terms of s 138D of the TAA. See Milburn New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 14,005. Also see Case V1 (2001) 20 NZTC 10,001.  Example 2: Exceptional circumstances justified the taxpayer’s agent not having commenced challenge proceedings within the designated response period. Several actions taken by Inland Revenue were found to have led to confusion and could not have been anticipated by an agent complying with accepted standards of business organisation and business conduct. See Treasury Technology Holdings Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,752. Compare this with C of IR v Fuji Xerox NZ Ltd (2002) 20 NZTC 17,470 (CA). This case also interprets the term “agent” in s 138D of the TAA.  See also Case U35 (2000) 19 NZTC 9,330 for a discussion of exceptional circumstances in terms of reg 25(2) of the Taxation Review Authority Regulations 1998. Shortened process for taxpayer-initiated disputes In limited circumstances the disputes process can be shortened (also referred to as being truncated) and can proceed to challenge in the TRA or the High Court. Section 138B(4) of the TAA is intended to be a mirror of the provisions under which the Commissioner can truncate a dispute. The taxpayer must notify the Commissioner of the proposed adjustment and identify how the adjustment fits into one of the following categories: ▪ the adjustment is in relation to a matter for which the material facts and relevant law are identical to those for another assessment for the taxpayer for another period that is the subject of court proceedings, or ▪ the adjustment corrects a tax position taken by the taxpayer, or an associated person, as a consequence or result of an incorrect tax position taken by another taxpayer that is, or was, the subject of court proceedings. This process is intended to allow these subsequent disputes to be fast-tracked and catch up to the main dispute so that the TRA or court can consolidate the disputes if it sees fit to do so. Law: TAA ss 138B, 138C, 138D  ¶4-230 Payment of tax in dispute when taxpayer has challenged assessment Briefly, a taxpayer who has challenged an assessment is not required to pay: ▪ the deferrable tax ▪ a shortfall penalty in respect of any tax in dispute, or  ▪ the interest accruing on the deferrable tax or shortfall penalty until the due date for payment of that deferrable tax. Deferrable tax is the tax assessed as payable under a tax law, or the GST payable by the taxpayer on a due date, and for which the taxpayer has filed a challenge. However, payment of all tax in dispute may be required if the Commissioner considers that, in the event the taxpayer’s challenge does not succeed, there is a significant risk that the tax in dispute will not be paid. If the taxpayer is successful, the Commissioner must refund (or pay to, or apply on behalf of, the taxpayer) the tax in dispute paid as required and any accrued interest. This refund, payment or application must be made on the day after the day that the final liability is determined. See ss 128(2)–(4) and 138I(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Tax in dispute may be provided to the Commissioner by acceptable security if the taxpayer cannot pay the sum in cash. See s 7A of the TAA. ▸Note: The current rules for deferrable tax mean that when there are consequential amendments to related taxpayers those taxpayers cannot defer their tax. For example, a company may have part of its expenditure disallowed as a deduction, which alters the amount of a loss offset made to another company in the same group. In that situation, both entities must object or challenge the assessments. This results in increased administrative and compliance costs for those taxpayers and lengthens the disputes process. The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to include consequential amendments resulting from an amended assessment that is in the disputes process within the definition of deferrable tax. The proposed amendment is intended to apply from the date of enactment of the Bill. Rate of interest  Interest continues to accrue on deferrable tax, even though a taxpayer has or may have no liability at the time to pay the deferrable tax. See s 120T of the TAA. Refundable tax in dispute is treated as overpaid tax for the purposes of the interest regime under Pt 7. See ss 128(3) and 138I(3) of the TAA. This means that the amount of interest payable by the Commissioner on overpaid tax and by a taxpayer on unpaid tax is calculated for each day in the interest period in accordance with the formula: t × r ÷ 365 where: t is the unpaid or overpaid tax on which interest is payable, and r is the Commissioner’s paying rate or the taxpayer’s paying rate applying on the day. See s 120E of the TAA. For the current interest rates, see ¶50-083. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 7A, 120E, 120T, 128, 138I  ¶4-232 Settlement of tax litigation As a result of comments made by the Court of Appeal in Auckland Gas Co Ltd v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,027 (CA), Inland Revenue (IR) revised its approach to reaching settlements in tax litigation. Previously, IR considered that its care and management responsibilities contained in s 6A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) severely impeded its ability to settle tax matters. In Auckland Gas, the Court of Appeal did not accept the Commissioner’s “restricted view” of his ability to settle tax disputes. The Court of Appeal also discussed the ability of the Commissioner to compromise in order to settle tax disputes in A-G v Steelfort Engineering Co Ltd (1999) 1 NZCC ¶55-005 (CA) (a Customs Act case). The Court noted that the Commissioner has broad powers to  enter into compromises where that is consistent with his duty under ss 6 and 6A of the TAA. Accent Management Ltd v C of IR (No 2) (2007) 23 NZTC 21,366 (CA) also confirms the Commissioner’s power to settle cases commercially. See ¶1-520 for further discussion concerning the Commissioner’s powers. The Commissioner’s duty to collect the highest net revenue over time is contained in s 6A (discussed above). In the context of settling tax disputes based on the perceived likelihood of success (litigation risk), IR considers that it can identify whether a proposed settlement meets this criterion only once the exact basis of dispute is identified and the “legitimate factual differences” are clear. In addition to the above limitations, IR will only settle cases in which litigation has commenced, a statement of position has been filed by the taxpayer and a specialist panel within IR has approved the settlement. In Bage Investments Ltd v C of IR (2003) 21 NZTC 18,294, the High Court upheld a settlement agreement made between the parties which depended on the final outcome of the Court of Appeal decision in C of IR v BNZ Investments Ltd (2001) 20 NZTC 17,103 (CA). The taxpayer and the Commissioner were engaged in a long-running tax dispute. The facts and circumstances involved in the dispute were similar to those in the BNZ case. Following the High Court decision in the BNZ case ((2000) 19 NZTC 15,732, in which judgment was given for the taxpayer), the parties in Bage agreed that the Commissioner would withdraw the objection against the taxpayer “in the event the BNZ case is upheld on final appeal”. The Court of Appeal decision in the BNZ case confirmed the High Court decision. The Commissioner and the taxpayer in Bage agreed that, for the purposes of their agreement, the Court of Appeal decision “upheld” the High Court’s decision. The Commissioner and the BNZ settled their dispute out of court. An appeal by the Commissioner to the Privy Council regarding the BNZ case was therefore abandoned. In these circumstances, Bage Investments Ltd called on the Commissioner to honour the settlement agreement. The Commissioner refused, arguing that the BNZ case had not been resolved by the courts but rather by private settlement; therefore, the  BNZ case was not “upheld on final appeal”. The Commissioner’s argument was rejected as it neither accorded with the plain words of the agreement nor made commercial sense. In October 2010, IR released interpretation statement IS 10/07, “Care and management of the taxes covered by the Inland Revenue Acts” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 17). The interpretation statement confirms that the Commissioner can enter into: ▪ settlements where taxpayers dispute the interpretation of the law or facts on which their liability has been assessed. See Accent Management Ltd v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,758 (HC), Accent Management Ltd v C of IR (No 2) (2007) 23 NZTC 21,366 (CA), and ▪ agreements as to the payment of outstanding tax, penalties and interest. See Raynel v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,583. The Commissioner may consider the litigation risk and decide that the resources required to undertake litigation could be better used elsewhere to maximise the new revenue collected. In Accent Management Ltd v C of IR (No 2) (2007) 23 NZTC 21,366 (CA), William Young P held (at [15]): The change in policy is justified by recognition that the Commissioner has limited resources and the function of collecting “over time the highest net revenue that is practicable within the law”. Major tax litigation is expensive and places a heavy strain on the human resources available to the Commissioner. The Commissioner must be permitted to make rational decisions as to how those resources can best be deployed. Further, “sensible litigation, including settlement, decisions” must necessarily allow for litigation risk. The courts have recognised the Commissioner’s power to settle and thus given effect to a key outcome intended to be achieved by enacting s 6A. See interpretation statement IS 10/07 at [151]–[161].  IR’s policy on settling tax disputes before an assessment has been issued is discussed at ¶4-118. Law: TAA s 6A  ¶4-233 Powers of hearing authority When hearing a challenge, the Taxation Review Authority or the High Court may: ▪ confirm, cancel or vary an assessment ▪ reduce the amount of an assessment ▪ increase the amount of the assessment to the extent to which the Commissioner was able to make the increased assessment at the time the challenged assessment was made ▪ make an assessment that the Commissioner was able to make at the time the Commissioner made the challenged assessment, or ▪ direct the Commissioner to make such an assessment. See s 138P(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. If it is proven, on the balance of probabilities, that the amount of an assessment is excessive by a specific amount, the Authority or High Court must reduce the assessment by that amount. See s 138P(1B). The assessments made or changes to the assessments made in accordance with the Authority or High Court decision are not subject to the four-year time bar. See s 138P(5). If the challenge relates to a disputable decision that is not an assessment, the Authority or High Court must not make or alter the disputable decision and may direct the Commissioner to alter the decision to conform and give effect to the Authority’s or High Court’s decision. See s 138P(2). Unless the Authority or High Court’s decision is under appeal, the Commissioner must make or amend an assessment or other  disputable decision as determined by the Authority or High Court. See s 138P(3) and (4). The Authority exercised its right under s 138P in Case X9 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,123 to make an assessment that the Commissioner was entitled to make but did not. See Case X13 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,193. Law: TAA s 138P  ¶4-235 Taxation Review Authority general jurisdiction The Taxation Review Authorities Regulations 1998 set down the procedure to be followed when pursuing a challenge before the Authority. Documents to be filed and served The first step in challenging an assessment (or other disputable decision) is filing the notice of claim. The notice must be in the form approved by the chief executive of the Ministry of Justice (see www.justice.govt.nz/assets/Documents/Forms/TRA-notice-ofclaim.pdf). If the Commissioner has issued the taxpayer with a disclosure notice (see ¶4-185) relating to the assessment or disputable decision, the notice of claim must contain: ▪ the Commissioner’s statement of position (see ¶4-185) ▪ the taxpayer’s statement of position ▪ any written notice by the Commissioner of the disputable decision (eg the notice of assessment) and the reasons for the disputable decision, and ▪ the taxpayer’s physical address (to which documents can be officially served by the Commissioner). If no disclosure notice has been issued to the taxpayer, he or she must include in the notice of claim the information that would have been in a statement of position (in lieu of including the parties’ actual statements). If no disclosure notice has been issued, the  Commissioner must file and serve a notice of defence on the taxpayer within 25 days of being served with the notice of claim. The notice of defence must contain the information that the Commissioner would have had to include in the statement of position. Three copies of the notice of claim are to be filed with the Authority by delivering or posting them to the Authority at the Ministry of Justice. The notice can be delivered to: The Registrar Taxation Review Authority Tribunals Unit AMP Building 86 Customhouse Quay Wellington 6011 Or posted to: The Registrar Taxation Review Authority Tribunals Unit Private Bag 32-001 Wellington 6146. The filing fee is $410. The Authority is able to waive the fee if it is satisfied that the disputant is unable to pay the fee or the proceeding concerns a matter of genuine public interest and is unlikely to be commenced or continued unless the fee is waived. Time limits A taxpayer must file a notice of claim within two months of an assessment being issued or, when the taxpayer is challenging a disputable decision other than an assessment, within two months of the Commissioner issuing notice that the taxpayer’s notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) is rejected. In Case W53 (2004) 21 NZTC 11,493, the Authority held that filing notices of claim with the Authority was complete on posting. The taxpayer must serve a copy of the notice of claim on the Commissioner within 10 working days of filing the notice with the  Authority. Service of the notice (or any other document required to be served) must be personally delivered to the Legal Services Leader, Legal Services, at the offices of the Inland Revenue, Asteron Centre, 55 Featherston Street, Wellington. Directions hearings and interlocutory applications Before the Authority hears a case, there must be a preliminary directions hearing at a place and time appointed by the Authority no sooner than 90 working days after filing the notice of claim (or a date agreed between the parties). At this hearing, the Authority will want to know how long the Commissioner and the taxpayer think the hearing will last. Both the taxpayer (or the taxpayer’s agent) and the Commissioner must attend the directions hearing, otherwise the challenge is deemed to be withdrawn unless leave is obtained to proceed with the hearing. The Authority has a discretion to allow a taxpayer to attend a directions hearing by means of a telephone conference link-up or by audio-visual link. The Authority will decide who pays the cost of the telephone conference. As soon as possible after the directions hearing, the Authority will send a notice recording its directions to the parties. Either the Commissioner or the taxpayer may then ask the Authority to set a date for the challenge to be heard. The Authority will then send the taxpayer a notice setting a time and date for the hearing. In addition to the directions hearing, either the taxpayer or the Commissioner can make an interlocutory application to the Authority at any time before a hearing. Interlocutory applications are usually made to sort out a preliminary matter (of evidence, fact or law) before the substantive hearing is held. Unless the interlocutory application involves a notice to admit facts or the issue of a witness summons, the applicant must file the application in writing with the Registrar of the Authority and serve a copy on the other party. The hearing At the hearing, the taxpayer may present his or her challenge personally or be represented by a solicitor, accountant or other person of the taxpayer’s choice.  Taxation Review Authority hearings are not open to the public and, in most cases, costs are not awarded. The exceptions to this are if either party does not appear at the hearing, or abandons or settles the dispute without giving adequate notice, the Authority strikes out a proceeding (see below), or the costs awarded relate to the filing fees paid by the objector or disputant. After the hearing, the Authority must give its decision in writing and state the reasons for the decision. The decision does not contain the taxpayer’s name or, as a general rule, any other information likely to identify the taxpayer. The Authority has the power to determine a proceeding on the papers if the Authority considers it appropriate. However, before doing so, the parties must be given the opportunity to comment on whether the proceeding should be dealt with in that manner. The hearing of a matter may be conducted by telephone, audiovisual link or other remote access facility if the Authority considers it appropriate and the necessary facilities are available. An Authority may strike out a proceeding if satisfied that it: ▪ discloses no reasonable cause of action ▪ is likely to cause prejudice or delay ▪ is frivolous or vexatious, or ▪ is otherwise an abuse of process. If a party is neither present nor represented at the hearing, an Authority may: ▪ if the party is required to be present, strike out the proceeding ▪ determine the proceeding in the absence of the party, or ▪ adjourn the hearing. Transfer to the High Court  The Commissioner can apply to have a challenge transferred to the High Court. See s 138N(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. For a discussion of the exercise of the High Court’s discretion when an application for transfer to the High Court is made by the Commissioner, see C of IR v Skudder (No 2) (2008) 23 NZTC 21,846. In that case the High Court declined the Commissioner’s application for a challenge to be transferred from the Taxation Review Authority. Law: TAA s 138N(2); TRA regs 7–13, 26–34; TRY ss 13A, 16, 20A, 20B, 21A, 22, 22B, 25  ¶4-245 High Court jurisdiction For taxpayers filing a challenge in the High Court, the procedure is as follows: ▪ the taxpayer files statement of claim (completed in accordance with the High Court Rules) and notice of proceeding, and pays the filing fee, all within the two-month response period ▪ the taxpayer serves copies of the statement of claim and notice of proceeding on Inland Revenue’s Director of Litigation Management as soon as practicable after they are filed (personal service is required at the address shown below), and ▪ the Commissioner files a statement of defence within 25 days after the date of service of the statement of claim and notice of proceeding. Section 17 of the Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 allows the Taxation Review Authority to receive evidence that would not ordinarily be admissible in a court of law. This relaxation of the rules of evidence previously extended to cases stated under Pt 8 of the Tax Administration Act 1994, which were heard in the High Court: see s 136(16) of that Act. However, there is no comparable provision dealing with challenges heard in the High Court under Pt 8A. It appears that evidence in High Court challenges is subject to the  rules of admissibility governing ordinary civil proceedings unless the Commissioner and the taxpayer agree that these are to be waived. Note that the evidence exclusion rule applies in respect of High Court proceedings. See ¶4-190. Also, security for costs may be awarded by the High Court in tax cases just as in any civil case: see Reefdale Investments Ltd v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,683. The Commissioner’s address for service is: Legal Services Leader Legal Services Inland Revenue Asteron Centre 55 Featherston Street Wellington.  ¶4-250 Test case procedures When the Commissioner considers that a challenge may be determinative of all or a substantial number of issues involved in other challenges, that challenge may be designated as a test case. Test cases are to be heard in the High Court. When a test case has been designated, the Commissioner may stay proceedings on other challenges by notifying the taxpayers concerned. The Commissioner may only stay proceedings where: ▪ the test case is considered to be determinative of all or a substantial number of the issues in the challenge proposed to be stayed, and ▪ the challenge proposed to be stayed has not yet been determined by the hearing authority. The taxpayer may contest the stay at any time by issuing a notice requiring the challenge to be heard. The Commissioner may, within 14 days of receiving the taxpayer’s notice, apply to the High Court for an order that the challenge be stayed. In Bage Investments Ltd v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,531 the High Court set out principles  relevant when considering an application for a stay. Justice Chambers noted that the list was neither exhaustive nor definitive. Also see C of IR v Erris Promotions, Wilson and Black Associates Ltd v C of IR, C of IR v West Coast Developments Ltd (2002) 20 NZTC 17,977 (CA), C of IR v A Taxpayer (2003) 21 NZTC 18,001 and B v C of IR, C of IR v Multiple Taxpayers (2004) 21 NZTC 18,404. Suspension of the disputes resolution process A disputant and the Commissioner may agree in writing to suspend the proceedings in a dispute if there is significant similarity between the facts and questions of law in the dispute and facts and questions of law in a test case (the test case being a separate challenge). A suspension of the dispute resolution process begins on the date of the agreement and ends on the earliest of the following: ▪ the date of the court’s decision in the test case ▪ the date on which the test case is otherwise resolved, or ▪ the date on which the dispute is otherwise resolved. The Commissioner can make an assessment or perform an action in relation to a suspended dispute that is consistent with the resolution of the test case. Time limit for the Commissioner to amend assessment If a dispute resolution process is suspended pending the decision in a test case, the Commissioner is required to make an amended assessment or perform an action in relation to the suspended dispute by the later of: ▪ the day that is 60 days after the last day of the suspension, or ▪ the last day of the period that: □ begins on the day following the day by which the Commissioner, in the absence of the suspension, would be required under the Inland Revenue Acts (listed in Schedule  1 to the Tax Administration Act 1994) to make the amended assessment or perform the action, and □ contains the same number of days as the suspension period. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 137. Law: TAA ss 89O, 138Q, 138R  APPEALING A DECISION ¶4-260 Appeal from Taxation Review Authority to High Court An appeal against a Taxation Review Authority decision determining a challenge is made under s 26A of the Taxation Review Authorities Act. This section applies to challenges brought under Pt 8A of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Generally, an appeal to the High Court in respect of a challenge may be brought as of right if: ▪ the amount of tax involved in the appeal is $2,000 or more, or ▪ the amount of net loss is $4,000 or more. There is an exception: there is no appeal if the Taxation Review Authority has made a determination under a tax law that provides for the Authority’s determination to be final. The procedure to be followed when filing an appeal against the determination of a challenge is set out in the High Court Rules. In C of IR v Dick (2000) 19 NZTC 15,849 the High Court held that Pt X of the High Court Rules (now Pt 20) require: ▪ the filing of the notice of appeal with the High Court registry and the service of a copy of the notice on the Taxation Review Authority Registrar  ▪ the service on the other party to the appeal within one month of the date of the Taxation Review Authority decision, and ▪ the completeness of the contents of the notice of appeal. Time for lodging appeal A party who wishes to appeal the determination of a challenge, and who is entitled to do so, must lodge a notice of appeal with the High Court and file a copy with the Taxation Review Authority. Under r 20.4(2) of the High Court Rules, the notice of appeal must be lodged within 20 working days of the Authority’s written decision. The 20working-day time limit must be observed unless special leave to extend the time to appeal is obtained under r 20.4(3). There is no right of appeal against an interlocutory ruling of a Taxation Review Authority until the ruling forms part of the Authority’s final determination of the objection or challenge: Case U41 (2000) 19 NZTC 9,380. Law: HC rr 20.3–20.8; TRY s 26A  ¶4-265 Appeal to Court of Appeal Either party may appeal to the Court of Appeal from a determination of the High Court when that court is the court of first instance, hearing a case pursuant to ss 24, 26 and 26A of the Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994. The appeal may be on a question of fact, or law, or both. Either party may appeal to the Court of Appeal from a determination of the High Court on a case stated on a question of law by the Taxation Review Authority, whether the case was stated before the Authority’s determination or afterwards on an appeal. An appeal lies to the Court of Appeal on questions of law, or fact, or both, from a determination of the High Court on an appeal from the Authority on a question of fact or fact and law. However, the Court of Appeal will be reluctant to consider fresh points. Example:  In a case concerning a partner’s entitlement to an interest deduction, the Commissioner was prevented by the Court of Appeal from raising an argument regarding the nexus between the interest expense and the production of assessable income not raised previously in the lower courts. See Finnigan v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,170 (CA).  Costs In any proceeding on objection before the courts, the courts may award costs against either party. This includes proceedings on a reference by the Authority on a point of law. Time limits Either party wishing to appeal a High Court decision to the Court of Appeal must notify the High Court in writing within 20 working days of the date the High Court delivers its decision. Law: TRY ss 28, 29  ¶4-270 Appeal to Supreme Court An appeal to the Supreme Court can be heard only with the Court’s leave. Leave will not be given unless the court is satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of justice for the court to hear and determine the proposed appeal. Leave to appeal will be given if any of the following criteria apply: ▪ the appeal involves a matter of general or public importance ▪ a substantial miscarriage of justice may have occurred or may occur unless the appeal is heard, or ▪ the appeal involves a matter of general commercial significance. Generally, there is no right to appeal directly to the Supreme Court from a court other than the Court of Appeal. However, a direct appeal may be accepted if exceptional circumstances are established.  Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court must be made in the prescribed form within 20 working days after the date of the decision against which a party wishes to appeal. An application for leave to appeal is made when the application is filed in the registry of the Supreme Court (the registry) and a copy of the application is served on every person who is a party to the proceeding in the court appealed from. An application may be filed in the registry by delivering it to the registry by hand or sending it by mail. Law: Senior Courts Act 2016 Pt 4; SCR rr 11–13, sch 1  ¶4-275 Judicial review procedure Under s 109 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), a disputable decision made by the Commissioner cannot be disputed in any proceedings except the objection proceedings under Pt 8 or a challenge under Pt 8A of the TAA. (A disputable decision is an assessment or some other decision made by the Commissioner that is open to objection or challenge proceedings and includes certain discretionary powers available to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue in the disputes resolution process.) The section further provides that, with the exception of those procedures, a disputable decision and all its particulars are conclusively deemed to be correct. This has the consequence, for example, that in proceedings for the recovery of tax shown to be owing under an assessment it would be no defence to allege that the tax was not properly payable. Judicial review is authorised in general terms by the Judicial Review Procedure Act 2016. That Act sets out procedural provisions for the judicial review of the exercise, failure to exercise, and proposed or purported exercise of a statutory power. It authorises the High Court to grant any relief that an applicant would have been entitled to in proceedings for a writ of mandamus, prohibition or certiorari, or for a declaration or injunction. This is when the relief would have been available in relation to the exercise, the refusal to exercise or the proposed or purported exercise by any person of a statutory power. If an application is successful, the court may not only declare that the impugned decision is unauthorised or otherwise lawful but also set  aside the decision. Furthermore, the court may direct the decisionmaker to reconsider any aspect of his or her decision. That correction may be accompanied by such other directions as the court thinks just. The matter is then to be reconsidered by the decisionmaker. The question of whether the judicial review procedure is available (despite the wide terms of s 109 of the TAA) to challenge tax assessments made by the Commissioner has been reviewed in many cases, for example: ▪ An application for judicial review of the decisions made by the Taxation Review Authority, the High Court and the Court of Appeal in respect of the JG Russell scheme was dismissed by the Privy Council in O’Neil v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,051 (PC). The Privy Council noted that judicial review should be granted only in exceptional circumstances. Such exceptional circumstances may arise when there is abuse of power or when the error of law claimed was fatal to the exercise of the statutory power, and it would be wasteful to require recourse to the objection procedure. The Court of Appeal reaffirmed these principles in Westpac Banking Corporation v C of IR (2009) 24 NZTC 23,340 (CA) at [59]. ▪ On application for judicial review, the High Court set aside the decision of the Taxation Review Authority in Case U35 (2000) 19 NZTC 9,330, and referred it back to the Authority for reconsideration. The High Court held that the Authority made errors of law in its judgment. See M & J Wetherill Co Ltd v Taxation Review Authority (2001) 20 NZTC 17,166 (HC). Application for judicial review was dismissed by the Court of Appeal in M & J Wetherill Co Ltd v Taxation Review Authority, C of IR v M & J Wetherill Co Ltd (2002) 20 NZTC 17,624 (CA). Application for leave to appeal to the Privy Council was dismissed in M & J Wetherill Co Ltd v Taxation Review Authority, C of IR v M & J Wetherill Co Ltd (2002) 20 NZTC 17,681 (CA). See also M & J Wetherill Co Ltd v Taxation Review Authority (2004) 21 NZTC 18,924 (CA).  ▪ In a case in which a taxpayer sought judicial review of taxation assessments, the High Court confirmed that judicial review is concerned not with the correctness of a decision but with the process or means by which it is made. See Douglas v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,971. Other judicial review cases include Ch’elle Properties (NZ) Ltd v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,622, W v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,602, Hollis v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,570, Wire Supplies Ltd v TRA (2005) 22 NZTC 19,395, Wire Supplies Ltd v TRA (No 2) (2005) 22 NZTC 19,401, Allen v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,473 (CA), Allen v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,827 and C of IR v Chesterfield Preschools Ltd (No 2) (2010) 24 NZTC 24,500. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 6A, 109; Judicial Review Procedure Act 2016  INCOME General Concepts  ¶5-010  Derivation of Income  ¶5-040  Recognition of Income  ¶5-075  Source and Residence  ¶5-135  Income  ¶5-160  Exempt Income  ¶5-593  Excluded Income  ¶5-750  GENERAL CONCEPTS ¶5-010 The concept of income Income tax is imposed by s BB 1. The courts have recognised that it is the Act itself that imposes the liability for income tax. The Commissioner acts in quantification of the amount due. Section CA 1(2) states that an amount will be included in income of a person if it is their income under ordinary concepts. To determine what receipts are included within assessable income and, consequently, subject to income tax, reference must be made to Pt C of the Income Tax Act 2007. While a number of receipts are deemed to be included in income, the Act does not attempt to provide an exhaustive definition of the term. It is also important to note that the provisions in Pt C treat certain types of receipt as income and therefore taxable, even though they may be of a non-income nature under the common law.  A further influence in determining the scope of income is the judicially developed rule that income is something that comes in, ie realisation. Consequently, non-monetary and non-realised gains are generally not treated as income (although certain provisions in the Act operate to override this proposition). Furthermore, windfall gains (gifts, bets, etc) are excluded from the concept of income because of their lack of connection to any income-producing property or activity of the recipient. Capital gains are also excluded, subject to the operation of certain deeming provisions mentioned above. Judicial definition It should be noted that the judicial definition of income does not necessarily correspond with an economist’s definition. One of the