 transaction to deplete the company’s assets, so that it is unable to fully meet its tax liabilities. See Spencer v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,818. The section focuses on asset stripping by contributors to avoid payment of an otherwise lawful demand for income tax rather than being a general tax recovery provision. See Case X11 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,175. The Commissioner’s ability to recover unpaid tax extends to civil penalties and use of money interest for which the company is liable. The tax recovery provisions apply to an arrangement entered into by the company that has the effect of leaving the company unable to satisfy its tax liability if it is reasonable to conclude that a purpose (which does not need to be the dominant purpose) of this arrangement was to have this effect, ie to avoid a tax liability. The recovery provisions do not apply to arrangements to which the Commissioner is a party, arrangements that have been previously assessed (and for which tax has been duly paid), or arrangements entered into when the company is under statutory management  pursuant to the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 or the Corporations (Investigation and Management) Act 1989. Example 1: TP Co sells its only asset, making a profit of $1,000. The company’s tax liability of $280 is not paid. The $1,000 is distributed by way of dividend to the four shareholders of TP Co. Tax of $280 on the dividend income is paid by the four shareholders. TP Co cannot pay its tax liability of $280. However, because its liability is equal to the amount already paid by the shareholders, s HD 15 will not apply to this arrangement. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 7, April 1992 at 45.  Liable persons Certain persons (as agents of the company) are potentially responsible for the company’s liability. These are all persons who were directors at the time the arrangement was entered into, shareholders who were controlling shareholders at the time the arrangement was entered into or persons (interested shareholders) who had a voting or market value interest in the company at that time where it was reasonable to conclude, having regard to the materiality of any benefit derived by the person, that the person was a party to the arrangement. Allocation of liability between directors and shareholders is not prescribed, although it would seem the Commissioner is able to choose those persons who will be made liable under s HD 15. A taxpayer has the right to challenge a demand made by the Commissioner under these provisions. Directors A director is defined for s HD 15 as a person occupying the legal office of director. Where a corporate entity does not have directorships, any trustee, manager or other person who acts in the same or similar fashion as a director would be treated as a director of that entity. The definition of director covers both executive and non-executive directors and both will be jointly and severally liable for the full tax liability. However, there are some exceptions to a director’s liability. The first is where the director derived no benefit from the arrangement, cast a dissenting vote against the  arrangement and gave notice of his or her dissent to the Commissioner (in writing) at the first reasonable opportunity after becoming aware of the arrangement. The second is where the director is a non-executive director and at all material times had no knowledge of the arrangement (or benefit). Example 2: Refer to the example above and assume the shareholders did not in fact pay tax on the dividend of $1,000. A and B are executive directors of TP Co. A votes in favour of selling the asset in question, while B dissents. B gives notice of his dissent to the Commissioner the next day. C is a non-executive director and votes in favour of the asset sale by proxy without having any knowledge of the matters discussed. C derives no benefit from the transaction. Of the three directors, the Commissioner can apply s HD 15 to recover TP Co’s unpaid tax from A. B is not liable, because he dissented from the arrangement and gave notice to the Commissioner at the first opportunity (and further because B derived no benefit from the arrangement). C is also not liable, because he is a non-executive director, who, at all material times, derived no benefit or had no actual knowledge of the arrangement. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 7, April 1992 at 45.  Controlling shareholders A controlling shareholder is any person whose voting or market value interests aggregated together with any other associated person equal or exceed 50%. Example 3: TP Co shareholders are: Mr A — 60% voting interest, Mrs A — 10% voting interest, C — 10% voting interest, D — 20% voting interest. C is Mrs A’s sister. Applying the associated persons test, Mr and Mrs A and C are associated persons. All three are deemed to have controlling interests in TP Co with an 80% voting interest or market value interest each (as the case may be) in the company. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 7, April 1992 at 46.  A controlling shareholder’s liability to outstanding tax (excluding a civil penalty or use of money interest that is part of the tax liability) will be limited to the greater of the market value of the person’s direct and indirect shareholding in the company at the time of entry into the  arrangement, and the value of any benefit derived by the person from the arrangement. Example 4: Mr and Mrs A and C receive $300 each in dividends from profits arising from the arrangement to sell TP Co’s $1,000 asset. D receives $100. At the time the arrangement was entered into, the market value of the company was $500. The amount of tax that is recoverable from TP Co is $300. The voting interests were held at 60% for Mr A, 10% for Mrs A and 10% for C. Liability will be as follows: Mr A — the greater of 60/100 × $500 = $300 (the market value interest) or $300 (the benefit received). Limit = $300. Mrs A — the greater of 10/100 × $500 = $50 (the market value of the interest) or $300 (the benefit received). Limit = $300. C — the greater of 10/100 × $500 = $50 (the market value of the interest) or $300 (the benefit received). Limit = $300.  In addition, the Commissioner can recover from shareholders the relevant proportion of civil penalty or use of money interest incurred by a company as part of any outstanding tax liability, ie liability is apportioned in the same proportions as for the principal tax liability. Interested shareholders Interested shareholders are shareholders who, at the time the arrangement is entered into, have a 50% voting interest or market value interest in the company and it could reasonably be concluded, having regard to the size of the benefit derived by the shareholder, that he or she was a party to it. The extent of an interested shareholder’s liability is determined in the same way as a controlling shareholder’s liability. Company acting as a trustee Note that when applying the voting and market value interests tests for the purposes of the definitions of “controlling shareholder” and “interested shareholder”, a company includes a company that is acting in the capacity of a trustee. Director’s liability and the COVID-19 safe harbour In July 2020, Inland Revenue released binding public ruling, BR Pub 20/06, “Income Tax and Goods and Services tax – Director’s liability  and the COVID-19 ‘safe harbour’ in schedule 12 to the Companies Act 1993” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 64). The ruling applies for the period from 3 April 2020 to 30 September 2020. The ruling deals with the directors of a company, in good faith, agreeing to the company carrying on business, including trading and incurring obligations, in reliance on the COVID-19 “safe harbour” in sch 12 to the Companies Act 1993 (CA) during the “safe harbour period”. The safe harbour period started on 3 April 2020 and ends on the close of 30 September 2020 (or later, if the period is extended by regulation). During the safe harbour period, a decision by the directors of a company to keep on trading, as well as decisions to take on new obligations, will not result in a breach of the duties in ss 135 and 136 of the CA. Sections 135 and 136 of the CA provide that a director of a company must not: ▪ agree to the business of the company being carried on in a manner likely to create a substantial risk of serious loss to the company’s creditors ▪ cause or allow the business of the company to be carried on in a manner likely to create a substantial risk of serious loss to the company’s creditors, or ▪ agree to the company incurring an obligation, unless the director believes at that time on reasonable grounds that the company will be able to perform the obligation when it is required to do so. A company’s directors can rely on the safe harbour only where: ▪ the directors consider in good faith that the company is facing or is likely to face significant liquidity problems in the next six months because of the impact of COVID-19 on the company or its creditors ▪ the company was able to pay its debts as they fell due on 31 December 2019 (or the company was incorporated on or after 1  January 2020 but before 3 April 2020), and ▪ the directors consider in good faith that it is more likely than not that the company will be able to pay its debts as they fall due within 18 months (eg because trading conditions are likely to improve or the company is likely to be able to reach an accommodation with its creditors). The ruling provides that reliance on the safe harbour by a director, and the company continuing to trade or carry on business or incur new obligations on commercial, ordinary business terms, will not, in and of itself, result in the application of s HD 15 or 61 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GSTA). It does not include an arrangement entered into in relation to a company that, on its own terms, would ordinarily be subject to s HD 15 or 61 of the GSTA, even if it is entered into during the safe harbour period. Law: IT07 s HD 15  ¶16-890 Reassessment of a company following liquidation Any time after a company has been liquidated, the Commissioner may issue or amend an assessment for any tax liability of the company, as if the company had not been liquidated. The Commissioner’s ability to issue the reassessment is not precluded by any prior approval he may have given to removal of the company from the register of members. See BNZ Finance Ltd v Holland (1997) 18 NZTC 13,461 (PC). Following the assessment, the Commissioner is required to nominate one or more persons considered to be liable for the tax payable under the assessment. The persons nominated become liable for the tax owing under the assessment, subject to the possibility of a successful challenge to the assessment.  A company that is liquidated and removed from the register of companies cannot be the subject of a valid assessment. There is no ability for the former company as a now non-existent person to respond to the assessment by issue of a notice of proposed adjustment within the prescribed statutory period. That conclusion is not altered should the company subsequently be restored to the register. Because it is a nullity, the Commissioner cannot rely on the so-called assessment as being deemed to be correct, so as to enable recovery of the company’s unpaid tax from the shareholders. See Spencer v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,818. Section 330(2) of the Companies Act 1993 provides that a company restored to the register is treated as if it had never been removed. In C of IR v Registrar of Companies (2007) 23 NZTC 21,215 proceedings brought by the Commissioner against an unregistered company were treated as validated. Law: IT07 s HD 15(6), (7); C93 s 330(2)  IMPUTATION Introduction to the imputation regime  ¶17-010  Legislation for the imputation regime  ¶17-015  Summary of principal features of imputation regime ¶17-020 Imputation Credit Account  ¶17-025  Trans-Tasman Imputation  ¶17-200  ¶17-010 Introduction to the imputation regime The imputation system commenced on 1 April 1988 with the objective of eliminating double taxation on company profits. Before the introduction of the imputation system, companies would be required to pay tax on their profits, and then shareholders would be required to pay tax on those profits when they were distributed. Under the imputation system, a company effectively attaches income tax credits (known as “imputation credits”) to cash and non-cash dividends and taxable bonus issues distributed to shareholders. The shareholders then use those imputation credits to reduce their own tax liability in respect of the company’s dividends. The shareholder includes both the dividends and the imputation credits as assessable income, with a credit being allowed against the shareholder’s income tax liability for an amount equal to the attached imputation credits. An individual on a marginal tax rate that is less than the company tax rate receives surplus imputation credits to offset against his or her income tax liability for the year. Any individual’s unused surplus imputation credits may be carried forward as a credit of tax to the next income year. The amount carried forward is reduced firstly by any amount extinguished when outstanding tax is written off (see ¶2119), and secondly by any tax liability for the next income year. (For certain other types of taxpayers (eg companies, trustees and Māori  authorities) surplus credits may be carried forward as a tax loss and offset against net income of succeeding income years.) See ss LE 2, LE 3, and ¶2-110. An individual taxpayer on a marginal tax rate that is higher than the company tax rate will receive insufficient imputation credits to fully cover his or her tax liability in respect of the dividend and will be liable to pay additional tax. Example: Widgets Ltd has taxable income of $100 for the 20X2–X3 income year, and has resolved to pay from its after tax income a fully imputed dividend to its only shareholder, William: $ Taxable income  100.00  Tax @ 28%  28.00  After tax income  72.00  Dividend  72.00  Imputation credits  28.00  Gross dividend paid to shareholder  100.00  William’s final tax liability in respect of the fully imputed dividend paid by Widgets Ltd will be as follows: (a) Assume William has an effective tax rate of 30%. $ Dividend income  72.00  Imputation credits attached  28.00  Gross dividend income  100.00  Tax @ 30%  30.00  Less: imputation credits  (28.00)  Tax to pay  2.00  (b) Assume William has an effective tax rate of 17.5%. $ Gross dividend income  100.00  Tax @ 17.5%  17.50  Less: imputation credits  (28.00)  Surplus imputation credits to carry forward  10.50  Tax to pay  0.00  (c) Assume William has an effective tax rate of 33%. $ Gross dividend income  100.00  Tax @ 33%  33.00  Less: imputation credits  (28.00)  Tax to pay  5.00  Every resident company is required to maintain an imputation credit account to track their imputation credits on an annual basis. An imputation credit account is a memorandum account only. Tax payments made by a company are credited to its account, and as those tax payments are passed on to shareholders, the account is debited. See ¶17-025. Companies are restricted by the allocation rules from attaching too many imputation credits to dividends. The number of imputation credits attached to a dividend must not exceed the maximum imputation ratio. See ¶17-060. For the imputation rules relating to qualifying companies see ¶19010, ¶19-115 and ¶19-120. Law: IT07 subparts LE, OB, ss IA 2(4)(b), LA 5(4), LE 1(1), LE 2, LE 3  ¶17-015 Legislation for the imputation regime The imputation and related memorandum account provisions are located in Pt O of the Income Tax Act 2007, consisting of the following subparts: ▪ Subpart OB — Imputation Credit Accounts (ICAs) (which deals with income tax paid by a New Zealand company that may be credited to shareholders). ▪ Subpart OF — Available Subscribed Capital Accounts (ASCAs) (which deals with available subscribed capital lost on redemption of units by unit holders in a group investment fund deriving category A income or in a qualifying unit trust). See ¶24-070. ▪ Subpart OK — Māori Authority Credit Accounts (MACAs) (which deals with income tax paid by a Māori authority that may be credited to a member of the authority). See ¶24-314. ▪ Subpart OP — which deals with the various memorandum accounts of consolidated groups. See ¶17-250 and ¶20-070. This chapter focuses principally on imputation. For discussion on the other memorandum accounts, see the paragraphs noted above. Law: IT07 Pt O  ¶17-020 Summary of principal features of imputation regime The principal features of the imputation system are as follows: ▪ New Zealand resident companies must maintain an imputation credit account (ICA). See ¶17-025. ▪ The tax year for imputation purposes is always 1 April to 31 March, irrespective of the company’s balance date.  ▪ Credits to the ICA include New Zealand provisional and terminal tax paid for the 1989 and later years and imputation credits on dividends received. See ¶17-040. ▪ Debits to the ICA include imputation credits attached to dividends paid and tax refunds. See ¶17-045. ▪ A New Zealand resident company can allocate tax credits to dividends paid to its shareholders by drawing from the pool of credits in the ICA. ▪ The first dividend in the tax year ordinarily sets the benchmark level for credit allocations in that year unless the statutory declaration procedures have been exercised (non-compliance incurs penalties). See ¶17-070. ▪ A company making a dividend payment is not obliged to allocate a credit (however, should the company do so, 28:72 from the 2011–12 income year of the “net” dividend is the maximum ratio that may be allocated). See ¶17-060. ▪ If an over-allocation of credits leaves the ICA in debit at 31 March for any year, the company must pay to Inland Revenue the amount of the shortfall plus 10%. See ¶17-100. ▪ Special anti-streaming rules apply to prevent the direction of credits to some shareholders and not others. See ¶17-120. ▪ Any change in shareholding or in shareholders’ interests of over 34% could bring about the cancellation of credits in the ICA. See ¶17-055. ▪ All ICA companies must file an annual imputation return, a company dividend statement and a shareholder dividend statement. See ¶17-080–¶17-090. ▪ The imputation regime is linked to the consolidation rules.  ▪ There is no provision for the grouping of imputation credits by companies in the same group (except where the company is a consolidated group: see ¶20-070) — imputation credits may be transferred by the payment of a dividend (companies included in the same group may pass on imputation credits by the actual payment of an intercorporate dividend and allocate tax credits under the normal rules for imputation). ▪ With effect for the 2017–18 and later income years, companies that are commonly owned, but not wholly owned, may transfer imputation credits as part of loss grouping. See ¶17-107. ▪ An individual’s tax liability is reduced by any imputation credits (with any excess credits carried forward to the next income year: see ¶2-110). ▪ Special rules prevent unit trust managers and trustees and managers of group investment funds that derive category A income from using imputation attached to dividends received upon the redemption of units where the dividend merely reflects the cost to those persons of purchasing the units. ▪ Non-residents are subject to non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) only if they hold a less than 10% voting interest in the company or the rate of NRWT applicable to the dividend is 15% or more. The monetary effect of the NRWT liability may be negated under the foreign investor tax credit (FITC) regime: see ¶26-500. ▪ A company has the option of declaring bonus issues (taxable or non-taxable). Taxable bonus issues may convey imputation to shareholders (non-taxable bonus issues, however, are not taxed in the shareholder’s hands and therefore do not carry any credits). See ¶16-570 and ¶16-685. ▪ A producer board, because it does not have a normal company shareholding structure, is treated as a company for tax purposes  to enable the board to pass on credits to its members. See ¶24150. ▪ Primary sector producer and marketing co-operatives which are incorporated as companies may allocate imputation credits to dividends paid. See ¶24-160. ▪ An Australian-resident company may elect to maintain an ICA. See ¶17-210. ▪ Certain companies may form an imputation group. See ¶17-240– ¶17-250. ▪ Special rules apply where overpaid tax is applied to other tax liabilities. See ¶17-040 and ¶17-045.  IMPUTATION CREDIT ACCOUNT ¶17-025 Companies required to maintain an imputation credit account (ICA) Under the imputation system a company may allocate or “impute” the tax it pays on its income to its shareholders on the dividends it pays. The gross dividends are included as income of the shareholders, but their individual tax liabilities are satisfied in part by the amount of any tax credit so allocated to the dividends. An ICA is a memorandum account (outside the books of account and not relating to income or expenditure) which records a company’s tax payments and the allocation to shareholders of the benefit of those accounts. Consequently, every New Zealand resident company is required to maintain an imputation credit account (ICA) because the balance in the ICA determines the amount of credits the company may allocate to its shareholders (ie to its dividend payments) and the ICA keeps a record of the tax credits which are available for allocation to dividend payments.  The New Zealand imputation system was extended to Australianresident companies from 1 April 2003. See ¶17-200–¶17-250. Law: IT07 ss OA 2(2), (3), OB 1  ¶17-030 Companies not permitted to maintain an imputation credit account (ICA) Certain companies are not permitted to maintain an imputation credit account (ICA). These companies are as follows: ▪ A company acting only in the capacity of trustee, as such a company is not within the definition of a “company” in s YA 1. When a company acts as a trustee, the trustee/beneficiary rules apply. However, there is an exception to this in that a company that is a group investment fund deriving category A income must operate an ICA. Companies that act partly in the capacity of trustees and partly in other activities allocate debits and credits to the ICA only in respect of their non-trustee activities. ▪ A company whose constitution prohibits anything from being distributed to any shareholder (or member). This would include an incorporated club or society. ▪ A company that derives only exempt income. This does not include a company that solely derives dividend income exempt from tax (see ¶16-800), in which case it must operate an ICA. ▪ A company that is a New Zealand resident and is treated as a non-resident by virtue of a double tax agreement. ▪ A Māori authority. See ¶24-288. A Māori authority is required to maintain a Māori Authority credit account. ▪ A local authority. ▪ A Crown Research Institute.  ▪ A subsidiary company of the Accident Compensation Corporation to which s 334(1) of the Accident Insurance Act 1998 or 266 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 applies. ▪ A multi-rate PIE. See ¶29-100. By virtue of s OB 1(1), non-resident companies are also not able to establish an ICA. When a company is non-resident for all or part of a year, it may not operate an account for the period in which it is a non-resident. When a company ceases to be resident in New Zealand, it must debit its ICA by the amount of the credit balance of the ICA immediately before the date of change of residency. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 10, March 1995 at 7. A company that is resident in New Zealand and Australia may choose to be an Australian ICA company and elect to maintain an ICA for the purposes of the trans-Tasman imputation system. See further at ¶17-200 and ¶17-210. Law: IT07 s OB 1(2)  ¶17-035 Information to record for imputation purposes Imputation is recorded over a tax year from 1 April to 31 March, irrespective of the company’s own balance date. Every company must record as its opening balance on 1 April in each year the amount of the closing balance as at the previous 31 March. An imputation credit account (ICA) balance at any time is the difference between the aggregate credits and debits to the account at that time. See s OA 3. The amount is a credit arising in the imputation credit account (ICA) when the closing balance is the excess of credits over debits and a debit when the closing balance is the excess of debits over credits. If the credits allocated to shareholders during the year exceed the credits to the company’s ICA when it is balanced on 31 March, further income and penalty taxes are payable. See s OA 3(3), (4).  For the tax year when the company first becomes an ICA company, the treatment of existing credits and debits is set out in s OA 7. Records relating to credit and debit entries in the ICA during a tax year must be retained for seven years after the end of the tax year. See s 22 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Law: IT07 ss OA 3, OA 7; TAA s 22(2)(k)  ¶17-040 Credits to record in imputation credit account (ICA) An imputation credit account (ICA) company has an imputation credit for an amount of income tax or provisional tax paid. Credits that arise are set out in Table O1 and must be read in conjunction with the relevant section when identifying ICA credits. Only one credit entry is allowed for each tax payment type made. See s OB 4(5). These credits increase the amount available for allocation to dividends paid to shareholders, while credits allocated to those dividends are debited to the ICA. For ease of reference the transactions that give rise to imputation credits in an ICA are discussed below and numbered in accordance with the numbering used in Table O1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Timing of credits The timing of when the credit arises is set out in Table O1: imputation credits (see below) and in each relevant section. Generally an imputation credit arises on the day the amount of tax is paid, transferred or withheld. ▸ Note: Table O1 is located immediately after s OB 84.  Table O1: imputation credits Row Imputation credit  Credit date  Further defined  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  Further defined  1  [Repealed]  2  Provisional tax and income tax paid.  day of payment s OB 4  3  Deposit into tax pooling account: any tax payment made by an intermediary into a tax pooling account. See ¶22365.  day of payment s OB 5  4  Transfer from tax pooling account: any transfer of tax by an intermediary to company of an entitlement to funds that are held in a tax pooling account.  day of credit  5  Payment of further income tax: day of payment s OB 7 an ICA company has an imputation credit for an amount of further income tax paid under s OB 65 or OB 66.  5B  Payment of qualifying company day of payment s OB 7B election tax: any qualifying company election tax paid by the company.  5C  [Repealed]  6  Amount of tax withheld for resident passive income: the amount of any RWT deduction treated as having been derived by the company in terms of s RA 9(1)(b).  day on which amount is withheld  s OB 6  s OB 8  Further defined  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  7  Imputation credit attached to dividend derived: imputation credits attached to dividends received by a company during the tax year.  day on which s OB 9 dividend is paid  7B  Attributed PIE income with day of imputation credit: an ICA attribution company that is an investor in a multi-rate PIE has an imputation credit for the amount of an imputation credit allocated to it under s HM 54.  s OB 9B  7C  Research and development tax credits: an ICA company has an imputation credit for the amount of R&D tax credits the company is entitled to.  day on which return of income for income year is filed  s OB 9C  8  [Repealed]  9  [Repealed]  10  [Repealed]  11  Transfer of debit balance when company leaves wholly-owned group: the credit arising in the ICA of a company that ceases to be a member of a whollyowned group.  day on which company leaves group  s OB 13  Further defined  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  12  Additional income tax payable when company leaves whollyowned group: the additional income tax paid by a company that ceases to be a member of a wholly-owned group under s OB 71.  day of payment s OB 14  13  Additional income tax when company joins wholly-owned group: the additional income paid by a company that joins a wholly-owned group under s OB 72.  day of payment s OB 15  14  Attribution for personal services 31 March if company is not qualifying company: under the personal attribution rules (38.89% from 1 April 2011) of an amount attributed under s GB 29. See s OB 16(1) and ¶33-325.  15  [Repealed]  16  Transfer from ASC account: the day of transfer amount of a credit balance transferred from an available subscribed capital account (ASCA) calculated under s OF 5(4). See ¶24-070 and ¶24192.  s OB 16  s OB 18  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  Further defined  17  Transfer to master fund by company: an amount equal to the tax percentage of the amount of expenditure transferred to a master fund (a public unit trust or group investment fund that derives category A income) under ss DV 5–DV 7.  day of transfer  s OB 19  17B  Transfer of credit to loss-using group company: amount of an imputation credit transferred by an ICA company under an election under s OB 83 relating to the tax loss.  day of transfer  s OB 19B  18  Māori authority credit attached day of to distribution: Māori authority distribution credits attached to a distribution made to the company during the tax year.  s OB 20  19  Transfer of balance of Māori authority credit account: in the case of a company that stops maintaining a Māori authority credit, the amount of the credit balance in the Māori authority credit account on the date the account is closed. See ¶24327.  s OB 21  day of transfer  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  Further defined  20  Replacement payment paid day of payment s OB 22 under share-lending arrangement: imputation credits being attached, or treated as being attached, to a replacement payment paid to the company under a sharelending arrangement during the tax year under s OB 64 or RE 25.  21  Imputation credit shown in credit transfer notice: imputation credits shown in a credit transfer notice issued by the company during the tax year.  day on which notice is given  s OB 23  22  Imputation credit on resident’s credit date in restricted amalgamation: an account of ICA company has an amalgamating imputation credit for the amount company of credit that arises on or after a resident’s restricted amalgamation. The credit arises in the amalgamated company’s ICA when ss OA 10–OA 17 apply.  s OB 24  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  Further defined  23  Reversal of debit for tax debit date of advantage arrangement: an debit amount to offset a debit for imputation credits determined to have been the subject of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage to the extent that it is subsequently established that the imputation credits were not the subject of any such arrangement.  s OB 25  24  Eliminating debit for loss of day of refund shareholder continuity or credit cancelling tax pooling account deposit that is refunded or credited: credit arises to eliminate what would otherwise be a double debit when there is a shareholder continuity debit under s OB 41 and after the shareholder continuity debit, a further debit arises under s OB 34 for a refund of an amount by an intermediary from a tax pooling account.  s OB 26  25  Amount of tax withheld by day on which Australian ICA company for amount is non-resident passive income: withheld an Australian ICA company has an imputation credit for an amount of tax withheld by the payer of non-resident passive income.  s OB 27  Row Imputation credit  Credit date  Further defined  26  Amount of tax withheld from day on which schedular payment to amount is Australian ICA company: an withheld Australian ICA company has an imputation credit for an amount equal to the amount of tax for a schedular payment paid to the company as a non-resident contractor.  s OB 28  27  Schedular income tax paid by day of payment s OB 29 Australian ICA company: an Australian ICA company has an imputation credit for a payment of income tax relating to the company’s schedular income tax liability for income derived under ss CR 3, CV 16 and CV 17 (non-resident insurers, shippers and film renters, respectively).  Provisional tax Any reference to income tax paid by a taxpayer in the imputation legislation is deemed to include a reference to provisional tax paid by the taxpayer. This means that a credit to the ICA arises for payments of instalments of provisional tax. An imputation credit also arises for a company on the transfer of overpaid provisional tax by one company within a wholly-owned group of companies to another company in the same group on the date the transfer is notified to the Commissioner. For additional credits arising in an ICA for an Australian ICA company, see ¶17-215. Law: IT07 ss OA 5, OA 7, OB 4–OB 29, Table O1, YA 2(7)  ¶17-045 Debits to record in imputation credit account (ICA) Debits to the imputation credit account (ICA) result in a reduction in the tax credits available for distribution to shareholders. Timing of debits For ease of reference the transactions that give rise to imputation debits in an ICA are discussed below and numbered in accordance with the numbering used in Table O2 of the Income Tax Act 2007. The following are debits to an ICA during a tax year: ▸ Note: Table O2 is located immediately after s OB 84.  Table O2: imputation debits Row Imputation debit  Debit date  1  [Repealed]  2  Imputation credit attached to day of dividend paid by a company: payment debit date is the day the dividend is paid. In some cases, the debit may not arise in the ICA of the company that actually paid the dividend, ie when the relevant dividend is paid under a staple stock arrangement within the scope of s GB 37. See ¶17-115.  Further defined s OB 30  Further defined  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  3  Allocation of provisional tax: provisional tax allocated by a company to an underpaid company in terms of s RC 32 (payments to be set off within wholly-owned group).  day of notice of allocation  s OB 31  4  Refund of income tax: a debit day of refund arises for income tax refunded to the company except in circumstances set out in s OB 32.  s OB 32  5  Overpaid income tax applied to meet another tax liability: any overpaid income tax applied by the Commissioner in satisfaction of tax liabilities other than income tax or provisional tax instalments. (An exception to this rule applies where a debit has already arisen owing to a breach in continuity of shareholding.)  s OB 33  6  Refund from tax pooling day of refund account: refunds from an intermediary from a tax pooling account, for which a credit has been recorded in the company’s ICA. See ¶17-040.  day of application  s OB 34  Further defined  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  7  Transfer of entitlement to another person in tax pooling account: a transfer from the company to another taxpayer by an intermediary of funds in a tax pooling account, for which a credit has been recorded in the company’s ICA. See ¶17-040.  set out in s OB 35  s OB 35  7B  Debit for transfer from tax 31 March pooling account for policyholder base liability: an amount transferred from a tax pooling account to a tax account with the Commissioner, to the extent to which the company is a life insurer, and the amount satisfies its schedular income tax liability for schedular policyholder base income or its income tax liability for a life fund PIE that is a multi-rate PIE.  s OB 35B  8  [Repealed]  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  9  Transfer, refund or use of tax day of credit: the amount transferred transfer, under s LA 6(2)(d) (remaining refund or use refundable credits: PAYE, RWT and certain other items), the amount of any credit of tax refunded to the company under s LA 6(2)(e).  10  [Repealed]  11  Overpaid income tax applied to satisfy pre-imputation income tax: the amount of overpaid income tax that is applied to satisfy the company’s income tax liability that was due and payable before the imputation rules came into force (unless the company previously experienced a breach in shareholder continuity).  Further defined s OB 37  day of application  s OZ 3  12  [Repealed]  13  Attribution for personal 31 March services: an amount equivalent to the credit entry made for 38.89% of the amount attributed under the personal attribution rules, if the company’s financial statements are adjusted to reflect this. See s OB 16.  s OB 40  Further defined  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  14  Debit for loss of shareholder continuity: credits that fail to meet the continuity of shareholding requirements. See s OB 41 and ¶17-055.  time of loss of s OB 41 continuity  15  Debit for on-market cancellation: a company repurchasing shares onmarket with no available subscribed capital remaining.  day of acquisition  s OB 42  16  Debit for breach of imputation ratio: a deficit resulting from the allocation of credits to shareholders which differ from the benchmark dividend imputation ratio.  31 March  s OB 43  17  Transfer for debit balance when company leaves whollyowned group: a company that leaves a wholly-owned group and elects under s OB 13 to debit the ICA of another group company with the debit balance in the leaving company’s ICA.  day on which company leaves group  s OB 44  Further defined  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  18  day on which return of income for income year is filed  s OB 45  31 March  s OB 46  Redemption debit for unit trust or group investment fund for income year: a debit arises where the manager or trustee of a unit trust or GIF derives a dividend on redeeming units purchased from investors in the ordinary course of its activities. The amount of the debit is the greater of: ▪ the total imputation attached to the dividend, or ▪ the amount of income tax liability that is attributable to the dividend. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 9, February 1996.  19  Transfer from member fund to master fund: a debit arises where a member fund transfers an amount of expenditure to a master fund under ss DV 5–DV 7. The amount of the debit is the amount of expenditure transferred multiplied by the company tax rate.  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  Further defined  19B  Transfer of credit to loss-using day of group company: an imputation transfer credit transferred under an election under s OB 83 to a company that uses a tax loss made available under s IC 5.  s OB 46B  20  Debit for policyholder base 31 March imputation credits: a life insurer who elects to transfer any of the credit balance in the company’s ICA to its policyholder base.  s OB 47  20B  Recipient of R&D loss tax credits  31 March  s OB 47B  21  Credit balance when Māori authority credit account starts: the amount of any credit in the imputation account of a company that becomes a Māori authority and establishes a Māori authority credit account.  day of becoming Māori authority  s OB 48  22  Credit attached to replacement day of payment paid by company payment under share-lending arrangement: imputation credits attached under s OB 64 to a replacement payment paid under a share-lending arrangement by the company during the tax year.  s OB 49  Further defined  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  23  Credit attached to dividend paid to company shown in returning share transfer: imputation credits attached to a dividend paid to the company during the tax year as a share user (or an associate of a share user) in a returning share transfer that is not a share-lending arrangement.  day of payment  s OB 50  24  Credit attached to dividend paid to company shown in credit transfer notice: imputation credits attached to a dividend paid to the company in a tax year and which are shown in a credit transfer notice issued by the company.  day of payment  s OB 51  25  Credit that is also credit to imputation credit account of consolidated imputation group  credit date for s OB 52 imputation credit  26  Imputation debit or debit date in s OB 53 policyholder debit in account of account of amalgamating company amalgamating company  Further defined  Row Imputation debit  Debit date  27  Debit for tax advantage arrangement: penalty debits when tax credits are allocated in pursuance of an avoidance arrangement in terms of s GB 36.  last day of tax s OB 54 year in which arrangement began  28  Retrospective attachment of imputation credit to non-cash dividend  day of payment of dividend  29  Final balance when ICA day of company status ends: an cessation amount equivalent to the credit balance in the ICA when a company ceases to operate an ICA.  s OB 56  30  Refund of amount of tax for non-resident passive income to Australian ICA company: see ¶17-215.  day of refund  s OB 57  31  Refund of amount of tax for schedular payment to Australian ICA company: see ¶17-215.  day of refund  s OB 58  32  Refund of schedular income day of refund tax to Australian ICA company: see ¶17-215.  s OB 59  s OB 55  Law: IT07 ss OA 7, OB 30–OB 59, Table O2  ¶17-050 Imputation credit account (ICA): debit or credit incorrectly recorded  Should the Commissioner consider that there has been an incorrect recording of debits and credits arising in the company’s imputation credit account, the Commissioner may issue a determination under s 104B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 adjusting the amount of a credit or debit or a credit/debit date. Any such determination under this section may be challenged in the same way as an assessment. Law: IT07 s OA 2(5); TAA s 104B  ¶17-055 Continuity requirements for carry forward of imputation credits A company cannot carry forward imputation credits unless a continuity of shareholding test is satisfied (see ¶18-023). This test limits the carry-forward of imputation credits for subsequent utilisation to situations where at least 66% of those persons who will benefit from such utilisation bore the tax liability that gave rise to the credit. In other words, imputation credits cannot be retained by a company that is later sold to shareholders who can make effective use of the imputation credits. To prevent this, credits in the company’s imputation credit account (ICA) at the time of the shareholding change are cancelled by a debit entry in the ICA. See ss OA 8(6)(a) and OB 41. Such an entry will be treated as arising on the date the shareholder continuity is breached. Shareholder continuity requirements For the purposes of the continuity of shareholding requirements for imputation, the minimum voting interest or market value interest of any person will be equal to the lowest voting interest or market value interests held by that person during the period. See s OA 8(7). When calculating a person’s voting or market value interests for imputation purposes, redeemable preference shares are taken into account. In addition, any debit can only be taken into account once for the purpose of determining whether a credit balance has been cancelled out. A credit cancelled out before the shareholder continuity breach by a debit (irrespective of whether the debit arises before the credit or subsequently) is not affected. The ICA anti-avoidance rules are  contained in s GB 34. Where any shares have been subject to an arrangement or where any rights attaching to shares in a company have been extinguished or altered in any way to enable the company to meet the shareholder continuity requirements, the relevant company is treated as not having met the continuity requirements in respect of those shares. See s GB 34(2). Qualifying companies The shareholder continuity requirements do not apply to qualifying companies. However, if a qualifying company no longer meets the requirements for retaining qualifying company status under ss HA 5–HA 9 then: ▪ an adjustment must be made to the company’s ICA under s HA 18, and ▪ the shareholder continuity requirements (set out above) apply to the company from the day its qualifying company status ends. See s OA 8(3B). Section OB 41(3B) stipulates that a qualifying company does not have an ICA debit for loss of shareholder continuity. The exception is in circumstances where the company loses qualifying status. See ss HA 11(1), HA 18, ¶19-055 and ¶19-075. Law: IT07 ss GB 34, OA 8, OB 41  ¶17-060 Allocation rules for imputation credits An imputation credit account (ICA) company may attach an imputation credit to any dividend it pays (ie both cash and non-cash dividends) to its shareholders. The total of the dividend plus the attached imputation credit will be included in the income of the shareholder. To keep track of its imputation credits every company is required to operate an ICA. See ¶17-025. The balance of the ICA effectively  determines the amount of credits the company is able to allocate to its shareholders in any tax year. Not all shareholders can use imputation credits (eg non-resident shareholders) to the same extent. Accordingly, companies may wish to direct credits to those shareholders best able to use them. To prevent excessive imputation credits being attached to dividends paid to certain shareholders, the credits are subject to two allocation rules, designed to ensure that credits are apportioned to all shareholders rather than to selected groups. The first allocation rule restricts the maximum amount of imputation credits that can be attached. It requires that the imputation ratio of the dividend cannot exceed the fraction set out under s OA 18(2): tax rate ÷ (1 − tax rate) The “tax rate” is the basic rate of income tax for companies for the income year. For example, the maximum imputation ratio for the 2011–12 and subsequent income years is 28:72 or approximately 39%. When the credit ratio of a dividend applied by a company exceeds the maximum ratio, the excess credit is not allowed to shareholders, nor is it included in the definition of “dividends”. The Commissioner has certain powers to determine whether there is an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage. See ¶17-120. The second allocation rule is designed to prevent the “streaming” of imputation credits to different shareholders or classes of shareholder during a tax year. This rule requires that every subsequent dividend paid by the company during the same tax year have the same imputation ratio as the benchmark dividend. See further at ¶17-065. Excluded Australian dividends Imputation credits cannot be attached to a dividend that is paid in relation to a share that is a debt interest under the Australian Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 and which was included in the Australian tax return of the paying company. This includes dividends paid on Australian-issued redeemable preference shares. For most purposes  the exclusion applies to dividends paid after 21 July 2005. However, several grandparenting rules apply. See further s OB 63. Law: IT07 ss OA 18, OB 60–OB 63  ¶17-065 Benchmark dividend for imputation purposes To prevent the “streaming” of credits to shareholders who are more able to use them, every dividend (including non-cash dividends) paid during a tax year must carry imputation credits at the same imputation ratio. The first dividend paid by a tax credit account company during the year is called the “benchmark dividend”. All subsequent dividends paid during that tax year must carry credits at the same ratio as the benchmark dividend. Example: If there are no credits attached to the benchmark dividend, every subsequent dividend paid in that year will also have no credits attached.  A breach of the imputation ratio rule gives rise to an imputation debit under s OB 43. See ¶17-045. However, a company may allocate credits to a dividend at a ratio that differs from the benchmark if the Commissioner is furnished with a ratio change declaration in accordance with s OB 61(6). See ¶17-070. The “payment” of non-cash dividends has benchmark dividend implications. Non-cash dividends are taxable to shareholders who are not also employees of a company. Non-cash dividends are treated as being paid to and derived by the shareholder once a year on the earlier of the date of notification to the shareholder of the amount of the dividend or six months after the end of the company’s income year. Non-cash dividends can arise from the provision of company property or interest-free or low-interest rate loans to shareholders. See ¶16-550 and ¶16-585. Law: IT07 ss OB 43, OB 61  ¶17-070 Ratio change declaration for imputation purposes The purpose of the allocation rules is to prevent the streaming of credits. Therefore, the imputation ratio of a dividend paid after the benchmark dividend in a tax year may only differ from that applied to the benchmark dividend if: ▪ the company completes a declaration to the effect that a subsequent dividend is not being credited at a different ratio to the benchmark dividend as part of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage, and ▪ a ratio change declaration (form IR 407) is filed with Inland Revenue before the date of payment of the subsequent dividend, although there is a discretion to accept late lodgements. Law: IT07 s OB 61  ¶17-075 Allocation debit for imputation purposes If the second allocation rule is breached, for example where a company fails to file a ratio change declaration (form IR 407) or Inland Revenue (IR) does not accept the declaration because the subsequent dividend paid is part of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage, an allocation debit arises to the imputation credit account (ICA). This allocation debit is calculated as follows: (a × b) − c where: a is the amount of all dividends paid by the company during the tax year (excluding any imputation credits attached) b is the lesser of the highest imputation ratio of dividends paid during the year and the maximum ratio allowable for the year, and  c is the amount of all imputation credits attached to dividends paid by the company during the tax year. Example: April 20X3  Dividend paid to A and B  $10,000 with $2,000 credits  July 20X3  Dividend paid to A and B  $10,000 with $3,000 credits  The dividend paid in July is credited at a different imputation ratio from the dividend paid in April. Assuming a ratio change declaration has not been filed with IR, a debit therefore arises to the ICA of $20,000 × 3/10 − $5,000 = $1,000. A debit of $1,000 arises to the ICA of the company at the end of that tax year. The company is liable to pay further income tax and imputation penalty tax. See further at ¶14-070.  The allocation debit is the difference between the total amount of imputation credits actually allocated to dividends paid out during the income year and the total amount of imputation credits deemed to have been attached if all such dividends had imputation ratios equal to the highest imputation ratio. The difference between the deemed and allocated credit is debited to the ICA even when this means an ICA debit at 31 March and the incurring of a penalty. Law: IT07 s OB 43  ¶17-080 Annual imputation return Every imputation credit account (ICA) company is required to furnish an annual imputation return on form IR 4J showing the opening and closing balances of the ICA, the amount and source of all debits and credits to the ICA for the previous year and the amount, if any, of further income tax or imputation penalty tax that may be payable. This return must be furnished no later than the time allowed in s 37 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) (ie the date for filing the return is the date the company is required to furnish a return of  income for the income year that corresponds to the tax year). Failure to file an annual imputation return on time will result in a liability to pay a late filing penalty. See s 139A of the TAA and ¶14-040. A company may file an imputation return relating to any period within a tax year, calculated from the first day of the year and ending on a day nominated by the company (an interim return). The last day of this period may not be more than seven days before the imputation return is filed. See s 70(3) of the TAA. Ceasing to be an ICA company When a company ceases to be an ICA company it must furnish to the Commissioner, not later than two calendar months after the last day it was an ICA company, an annual ICA return covering the period from the first day of the tax year and ending with the last day the company was an ICA company. See s 70(2) of the TAA. The Commissioner also has the power to require a company to file a return of the entries in its ICA at any time. Example: Stripy Ltd goes into liquidation on 4 February 20X2. Stripy Ltd is still in the process of liquidation on 31 March 20X2. The liquidator completes and files the final financial statements of Stripy Ltd and the company is removed from the companies register on 20 May 2012. The liquidator must file an annual imputation return for the tax year ended 31 March 20X3, and an imputation return for the period 1 April 20X2 to 20 May 20X2.  Tax pooling account An ICA company or consolidated imputation group (see ¶17-250) that is affected by a refund or transfer relating to an amount in a tax pooling account must file a revised ICA return for a tax year if: ▪ the refund or transfer occurs after the end of a tax year, and ▪ the refund or transfer causes the balance of the ICA for the end of the tax year to become a debit balance, or a balance that is less than the amount of a refund that the company would anticipate receiving but for the limitation on the amount that can  be refunded under s RM 13(1) (see ¶17-105). See also s RM 13(2). The revised ICA return must be filed within two calendar months of the date of the refund or transfer in the tax pooling account. Additional entries are required in a company’s ICA if it is a policyholder credit account (PCA) company or a public unit trust or a group investment fund that derives category A income (see ¶24-070 and ¶24-192). See ¶17-225 for additional ICA return filing requirements for an Australian ICA company. Law: TAA ss 69, 70, 139A  ¶17-085 Company dividend statement for imputation purposes Before 1 April 2020 Before 1 April 2020, when an imputation credit account (ICA) company declared a dividend, whether or not it attached any imputation credits, it had to complete a “company dividend statement”. This statement set out: ▪ the number of shares in respect of which a dividend was declared (and, if it was a bonus issue, the number of shares contained within that issue) ▪ the date the dividend was declared and the payment date ▪ the total amount paid as a dividend in respect of the shares (or, if it was a bonus issue, the amount of the bonus issue as determined in accordance with s CD 7 or CD 8) ▪ the total amount of imputation credits attached in respect of the dividend (if there were no credits attached, the amount had to be shown as nil)  ▪ the imputation ratio of the dividend, and ▪ any further information the Commissioner required. In accordance with s 37 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), the company dividend statement had to be sent to Inland Revenue by the last day for filing the income tax return for the income year which corresponded with the imputation year in which the dividend was declared. See ¶17-235 for additional requirements for an Australian ICA company. From 1 April 2020 The requirement for a company dividend statement to be provided was repealed with effect from 1 April 2020. From that date, a company that pays a taxable dividend has to provide the information specified in s 25G and detailed in sch 6 of the TAA. In addition, the relevant information has to be provided on the 20th of the month following the month in which the dividend was paid. Note that a payer was able to choose to apply the new investment income information provisions in subpart 3E of the TAA since 1 April 2019. Law: TAA ss 25E(1)(c), 25G, 227E, sch 6  ¶17-090 Shareholder dividend statement for imputation purposes A shareholder dividend statement must be sent to a shareholder when a dividend with an imputation credit attached is paid. Shareholders must be notified whenever resident withholding tax (RWT) is deducted from a dividend (except in relation to a “dividend treated as interest”, which is essentially a dividend that cannot carry an imputation credit, see ¶15-030). This allows the shareholder to claim the appropriate amount of the credit whenever credits are paid. The statement shows the following: ▪ the name of the company  ▪ the date the dividend has been paid ▪ the name and address of the shareholder to whom the dividend has been paid ▪ the amount of RWT withheld, if any ▪ the amount of NRWT withheld, if any ▪ the amount of the dividend paid to the shareholder (ie the net dividend) ▪ the amount of any imputation credit attached to the dividend ▪ the aggregate of the amount of the dividend and the amount of any imputation credit attached to the dividend (ie the gross dividend) ▪ the amount of any dividend paid to a retirement savings scheme as a retirement scheme contribution for the shareholder ▪ the name of the retirement savings scheme ▪ the amount of any imputation credit used and the amount of any imputation credit remaining after the company has used such a credit to satisfy a liability for RSCT, and ▪ such other information as may be required by the Commissioner. See ¶17-225 for additional requirements for an Australian imputation credit account company. A shareholder dividend statement is deemed to have been given to a shareholder if it is delivered in a way described in s 14F (see ¶1-645) to the shareholder or a person authorised to act on their behalf. Law: TAA ss 14F(4), 29  ¶17-100 Further income tax, imputation penalty tax and other penalties for imputation purposes Failure to comply with the imputation provisions results in a company being liable to a penalty regime made up of further income tax, imputation penalty tax and late payment penalties. Failure to file the annual imputation return may result in the imposition of a late filing fee and, depending on the degree of care exercised, possible shortfall penalties. The range of possible penalties for non-compliance is set out below. Further income tax Where there is a debit balance in a company’s imputation credit account (ICA) at 31 March of any year, the company is liable to pay further income tax. The amount of further income tax payable is equal to the debit balance. No further income tax is payable if the debit balance in the company’s ICA arose solely because of a debit recorded on the transfer of expenditure by the company to a master fund under ss DV 5–DV 7. In the majority of cases, further income tax is payable not later than 20 June following the end of the imputation year in which there was a debit balance. Example 1: At 31 March 20X3, Co X’s ICA shows a debit balance of $20,000. Co X is therefore required to pay further income tax of $20,000 by 20 June 20X3.  However, if a company ceases to be an ICA company, and immediately before that there is a debit balance in its ICA, further income tax is payable no later than the last day on which the company is an ICA company. Where the company ceases to be an ICA company because it becomes a portfolio investment entity, the further income tax is payable by the end of the last tax year.  Example 2: Co Y is being liquidated. The registrar of companies removes the company from the register on 31 March 20X3 (ie the company ceases to be an ICA company on that date). Immediately before 31 March 20X3, the company has a debit balance in its ICA of $20,000. Co Y is liable to pay further income tax of $20,000 on 31 March 20X3.  Companies that are to continue trading may credit any further income tax paid against any future income tax liability or instalment of provisional tax for which they become liable. The effective date of the credit is the date on which the payment of further income tax is received by Inland Revenue. A company that is liable to pay further income tax in relation to a tax year may elect to credit a tax payment made after the end of the tax year to satisfy the further income tax liability. The income tax paid after the end of the tax year must be in relation to an income year that corresponds to a tax year in which the company was an ICA company. The effective date of the credit is the date on which the Commissioner receives the payment of income tax. Reduction of further income tax A company’s liability for further income tax may be reduced if the company notifies the Commissioner and: ▪ the company had a debit balance in its ICA at the end of the immediately preceding tax year (the earlier debit balance), and ▪ the earlier debit balance exceeds the total of the credits that have arisen in the ICA during the tax year. The liability for further income tax will be the debit balance in the company’s ICA at the end of the second year less the greater of zero and the amount by which the first year’s ICA debit balance exceeds the credits made to the account during the second tax year. Example 3: FIT Co Ltd has a debit balance in its ICA at 31 March 20X3 of $10,000. At 31 March 20X2 the company’s ICA balance had a debit balance of $5,000. During the 20X2–X3  tax year, the total amount of credits arising in the company’s ICA was $2,000. FIT Co Ltd notifies the Commissioner. The further income tax payable for the 20X2–X3 tax year will be reduced to $7,000, being $10,000 less $3,000 ($5,000 less $2,000).  The further income tax paid is also a credit entry in the ICA in the year in which it is paid. See s OB 7. See also ¶17-220 for an Australian ICA company. Imputation penalty tax A company that is liable to pay further income tax under s OB 65 in respect of an end of year debit balance in its ICA is also liable to pay a special tax known as imputation penalty tax. This tax is imposed at the rate of 10% on the amount of further income tax payable. The due date for payment of imputation penalty tax is the same as that for further income tax (ie 20 June following the end of the tax year to which the penalty relates). Example 4: Following on from Example 1 above, in addition to the $20,000 further income tax, Co X is also required to pay $2,000 of imputation penalty tax. The total amount payable on 20 June 20X3 is therefore $22,000.  Imputation penalty tax is not payable by companies that are liable to further income tax by virtue of s OB 66 (ie debit ICA balance immediately before the company ceases to be an ICA company). Example 5: Following on from Example 2 above, Co Y is not liable to pay imputation penalty tax because it is liable for further income tax under s OB 66 rather than s OB 65.  Unlike the further income tax paid, the imputation penalty tax is not a credit entry to the company’s ICA. Section OB 67 ensures that a debit balance in a company’s ICA at the end of a tax year on which further income tax has already been  paid does not give rise to double taxation if the ICA also has a debit balance at the end of the following tax year. Penalties for late payment of further income tax and imputation penalty tax If a company fails to pay its further income tax liability and any imputation penalty tax by the due date, the general compliance and penalties rules will apply. An initial late payment penalty is applied in two stages: a 1% penalty the day after the due date and, if the amount outstanding is not paid within a week of the due date, a further 4% penalty is applied to the total outstanding amount. This is followed by a monthly incremental penalty of 1% until the date of payment. See s 139B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Note that with effect from 1 April 2017, the 1% monthly incremental late payment penalty was removed to the extent the overdue tax is income tax for the 2017–18 or later income years. See ¶14-050. However, further income tax and imputation penalty tax fall within the definition of “ancillary tax” in s YA 1 and were therefore still subject to the monthly incremental late payment penalty when they remained unpaid. However, as a result of changes in the way the taxes are administered under the new START platform, it was found necessary to also remove the penalty from further income tax. Thus, with effect from 1 April 2018, the 1% monthly incremental late payment penalty was removed from further income tax for the 2018–19 and later income years. However, the 1% monthly incremental late payment penalty still applies to imputation penalty tax (as it does not satisfy the definition of a “civil penalty” for the purposes of s 139B(2B)(e)). Taxpayers are notified the first time they make a late payment of tax. The late payment penalty will then only be imposed if the payment is not made within one month after the date of the notice. However, if the taxpayer makes other late payments within two years of the due date of the first late payment, the late payment penalty will be imposed as usual from the day after the due date. See s 139B(1) of the TAA. The Commissioner is also empowered to apply a grace period and to determine whether the grace period should have applied to an earlier period.  Use of money interest runs from the day after the due date on the unpaid income tax, including accumulated penalties and shortfall penalties. The potential application of late filing penalties under s 139A of the TAA, shortfall and criminal penalties must also be borne in mind. See ¶14-050–¶14-100 and ¶14-230. Remission of late payment penalty and interest on further income tax In certain circumstances the Commissioner must remit any interest payable by the company and the late payment penalty payable on the further income tax. See ¶14-180 and s 181C of the TAA. Remissions of imputation penalty tax In accordance with s 180 of the TAA the Commissioner may remit imputation penalty tax in the following circumstances: ▪ the liability for imputation penalty tax arose by virtue of a debit to the company’s ICA in relation to imputation credits determined to have been the subject of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage (under the anti-avoidance provisions in ss GB 35 and GB 36) and, subsequently, it is established that the imputation credits were not the subject of any such arrangement ▪ the liability for the imputation penalty tax arose by virtue of a tax refund having been sent, but not received by the company before the end of the tax year, or ▪ the liability for the imputation penalty tax arose by virtue of a debit arising under any provision of s OB 33 (application of overpaid income tax) or OP 31 (application of overpaid income tax of consolidated imputation group), and OZ 3 (application of overpaid income tax for pre-imputation income year), and the taxpayer did not become aware of the debit in time to remove the debit balance before the end of the year. In the event that remission occurs under one of these heads, the Commissioner is also required to remit any late payment penalties  imposed on the further income tax and imputation penalty tax under s 139B of the TAA. Remission or cancellation of imputation penalty tax, late payment and late filing penalties, and interest In addition to the specific remission provisions referred to above, the general remission and cancellation provisions in ss 183A–183H of the TAA may also apply. See ¶14-180. Challenges to assessments of further income tax The Commissioner may issue an assessment for the amount of further income tax payable. Assessments of further income tax are treated in similar fashion to assessments of ordinary income tax. See s 101(3) of the TAA. This means that assessments are deemed to be correct unless proceedings challenging the assessment are made (see ¶4-220) and assessments may be varied by the Commissioner in accordance with s 113 of the TAA. If the Commissioner issues an assessment of further income tax that increases the amount payable, he is required to set a new due date for payment of that further income tax. There will be no penalty on the newly assessed tax if it is paid by the new due date. Furthermore, any use of money interest applying from the date of the notice until the due date specified in the notice will be cancelled. Law: IT07 ss BF 1(c), IA 2(4)(d), OB 7, OB 65–OB 70, YA 2(1)–(3); TAA ss 101, 139B, 140B, 142E(1), 180, 181C  ¶17-105 Limit on refund and transfer of tax for imputation purposes Under s RM 2 the Commissioner is required to make a refund of tax when the Commissioner is satisfied that the tax has been paid in excess of the amount properly payable. See ¶2-145. For an imputation credit account (ICA) company, tax paid in excess may not include any further income tax paid under ss OB 65 and OB 66. See s RM 17. Limit on refunds — s RM 13  In s RM 13 the amount of a refund to be paid to an ICA company or any transfer of tax within a wholly-owned group of companies is limited to the amount of the credit balance in the ICA of the company at the later of: ▪ the last day of the tax year just ended (unless the company has an extension of time for filing its annual ICA return), or ▪ the last day of the period for which the company is required by the Commissioner to file a return under s 70(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), or ▪ the last day of a period for which the company filed an annual ICA return for a specified period under s 70(3) of the TAA. With respect to a company with an extension of time for filing its imputation return that has not filed its return for the most recent tax year at the date the refund is due, but has filed its return for the preceding tax year, he refund or the amount transferred within a wholly-owned group of companies is limited to the credit balance of the company’s ICA on the last day of that preceding tax year, not the most recently ending tax year. See s RM 13(3). Note that s RM 13 does not apply to the refund of provisional tax paid under AIM. Company ceasing to be an ICA company — s RM 14 A restriction is imposed on a refund of income tax entitled to be paid or transferred where a company has ceased to be an ICA company. A company that is entitled to: ▪ have a refund of income tax when the company was an ICA company, or ▪ make a transfer when the company was an ICA company can have a refund or make a transfer for an amount which cannot exceed the final credit balance of the ICA at the time the company stops being an ICA company.  This restriction also applies to an ICA company that is part of a wholly-owned group of companies that becomes entitled to make a transfer of an amount of overpaid provisional tax under s RC 32. Reduction in credit balance — s RM 15(1) When the ICA company becomes entitled to more than one refund or more than one transfer a limit is applied to the second refund or transfer. A credit balance referred to in ss RM 13 and RM 14 is reduced by a tax refund or transfer of tax paid within a wholly-owned group of companies, made earlier in the same tax year. See s RM 15(1). Increase in credit balance — s RM 15(2) and (3) The credit balance of the company’s ICA is increased by the amount of any debit made to the company’s ICA for failure to maintain shareholder continuity imputation credits under s RM 15(2). The amount of the increase is equal to the amount that satisfied the company’s income tax liability for the tax year and before the date in which the credit balance is determined under ss RM 13 and RM 14. The company may receive a refund of tax, or make a transfer of overpaid provisional tax to another company within the same whollyowned group under s RM 32, for an amount of a debit for loss of shareholder continuity made under s OB 41 up to the balance in the ICA at the time of the loss of shareholder continuity. This is the case even though the ICA company has a nil balance in its ICA at the time entitlement to a refund or transfer of overpaid tax is determined as a result of a loss of shareholder continuity: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 7, April 1992 at 17. The limits on refunds of tax payable to ICA companies are intended to prevent the refund of income tax that may have been applied to the benefit of shareholders through the attachment of imputation credits. With effect from 1 April 2018, for a company that has a refundable tax credit after a debit to its ICA for failure to maintain shareholder continuity under s OB 41, a credit balance is increased by the lesser  of the amount of the debit under s OB 41 and the amount by which the refundable tax credit exceeds the total credits to the company’s ICA during the period from the date of the debit to the date on which the credit balance is to be determined under ss RM 13 and RM 14. Application of amount not refunded or transferred — s RM 16 Where restrictions are made under ss RM 13 and RM 14 on refunds or transfers within a wholly-owned group, there are several possibilities available in relation to the amount unable to be refunded or transferred. The first possibility is that the tax that cannot be refunded or transferred can be credited towards payment of any income tax or provisional tax payable by the company for the same tax year as the entitlement to the refund or transfer. The second possibility is that the tax that cannot be refunded or transferred is able to be credited towards payment of any income tax or provisional tax payable by the company for another tax year that is not the same tax year as the entitlement to the refund or transfer. A further possibility is that the tax that cannot be refunded or transferred is not able to be credited in payment of income tax or provisional tax for a tax year because the company has been liquidated or for any other reason. If there is no tax liability to be set off, the Commissioner retains the amount of overpaid tax. In this situation there would be a debit entry in the ICA of the cash amount refunded to the company, but there would not be a debit entry for the amount retained by the Commissioner. The amount of tax that cannot be refunded or transferred to a company that is part of a wholly-owned group may be applied in crediting provisional tax if the taxpayer’s residual income tax is payable on the provisional tax instalment date. See s RM 16(3). Limits on refunds of tax for certain public unit trusts and group investment funds Special rules apply upon the liquidation of a public unit trust or group investment fund, or when a public unit trust or group investment fund chooses to become a portfolio investment entity, when there is a nil  balance in the public unit trust’s or group investment fund’s ICA. A refund of tax is allowed to the extent that there is a credit in the public unit trust’s or group investment fund’s available subscribed capital account (ASCA). The amount of the refund is limited to the imputation credit value of the balance of the public unit trust’s or group investment fund’s ASCA. This value is calculated by multiplying the credit balance in the ASCA by the imputation ratio formula in s OA 18(2). The company rate of tax used in the imputation ratio formula is the company rate of tax for the year in which the liquidation occurs or the election is made. See s RM 33. For more on ASCAs, see ¶24-070 and ¶24-192. Limits on refunds of tax paid to Māori authorities Section RM 22 limits the amount of a tax refund paid to a Māori authority. The rules are similar to those outlined above for a company. See ¶24-327. Law: IT07 ss RM 13–RM 17, RM 33  ¶17-107 Loss grouping and imputation credits Background Less income tax is paid when a profit company and a loss company engage in loss grouping, which results in the profit company receiving fewer imputation credits than it would have, had it not engaged in loss grouping. Having fewer imputation credits becomes an issue when that profit company later chooses to pay a dividend to its shareholders. Unless the profit company is wholly-owned by a corporate parent, the dividend will be taxable, and the imputation credits in the profit company’s imputation credit account will determine whether it is able to fully impute that dividend. In some cases, the profit company will have insufficient imputation credits to enable it to pay a fully imputed dividend. This results in a tax impost for the shareholder upon distribution of the loss-sheltered profits, effectively clawing back the benefit of the loss grouping. This inability for non-wholly-owned companies to fully impute dividends as a result of loss grouping was considered inappropriate  and changes were made in 2017. With effect from 1 October 2016 for the 2017–18 and later income years, amendments allow companies that are commonly owned, but not wholly owned, to transfer imputation credits as part of loss grouping. Amount of credits The maximum amount of credits groups may elect to transfer is equal to the tax effect of the total of loss grouping to a company within the commonly owned group that is in a profit position. There is no restriction on a group transferring less than the maximum amount. Destination and source of credits The company receiving the imputation credits is always the same company that received the benefit of the loss grouping — the profit company. The credits are sourced from either the company that has transferred its loss to the profit company (the loss company) or another company in the group that has an ownership interest of at least 66% in the profit company (the imputation source company). Eligibility for transfers Companies are eligible to transfer imputation credits if all of the following criteria are met: ▪ the profit company, the loss company and the imputation source company (if applicable) are all part of the same commonly owned group and eligible to maintain an imputation credit account ▪ the profit company is not part of the same wholly-owned group with either the loss company or the imputation source company (if applicable), and ▪ the loss company has elected to undertake an imputation credit transfer. Imputation credit transfer election  The loss company must make an election to the Commissioner to transfer imputation credits. The election must include the name and tax file number of the profit company, loss company and imputation source company (if applicable), and the amount of the loss offset and/or subvention payment. Timing of imputation credit transfer The imputation credit transfer is recorded by an entry in the imputation credit account of each company at the time the loss company pays a dividend to its shareholders, rather than when the loss grouping occurs. This is the time at which the issue of insufficient imputation credits arises and mitigates the risk that this mechanism could be used as a way of imputation credit shopping. If the amount of the imputation credits attached to the dividend is less than the loss offset and/or subvention payment in the election, the transfer is limited to the amount of the imputation credits attached to the dividend. Any remaining balance from the election continues to be available to be transferred if and when a subsequent dividend is paid. Limit on imputation credit transfers Notwithstanding the amount of an imputation credit transfer election, credits cannot be transferred if any of the following events occur: ▪ the loss company, profit company and imputation source company (if applicable) cease to be part of a commonly-owned group or become part of a wholly-owned group ▪ the loss company, the profit company or the imputation source company (if applicable) breach the shareholder continuity requirements for memorandum accounts for the period beginning on the first day after the year that contains the loss grouping, or ▪ four years have passed since the end of the income year of the profit company that benefited from the loss grouping.  Law: IT07 ss OB 19B, OB 46B, OB 83, OB 84  ¶17-110 Limits on amount of imputation credits The limits for imputation credits are set out in subpart LE. If the amount of the tax credit becomes limited under one of those provisions then the assessable income of the shareholder is similarly reduced. The shareholder can only include in assessable income the amount actually available as a tax credit rather than the amount that may have been attached to the dividend. Minor trust beneficiaries A special provision applies when a distribution of beneficiary income made to a minor includes dividends with imputation credits attached. Section LE 4 provides that an imputation credit calculated in relation to a minor trust beneficiary is included in the assessable income of the trustee and does not form part of the beneficiary’s assessable income. Credits of a beneficiary Where a beneficiary derives dividends or distributions with the credits attached a formula must be applied to pro-rate credits over the total of all distributions made to beneficiaries during the relevant income year. The formula is as follows: (person’s distributions ÷ trust distributions) × (total beneficiary credits − person’s supplementary dividend) where: person’s distributions is the total amount of all distributions from the trust made to the beneficiary during the tax year trust distributions is the total amount of all distributions from the trust made to all beneficiaries during the tax year total beneficiary credits is the total amount of all imputation credits and the total amount of supplementary dividends paid to all beneficiaries of the trust during the tax year, and  person’s supplementary dividend is the total amount of all supplementary dividends from the trust made to the beneficiary during the tax year. If a beneficiary receives a supplementary dividend under the foreign investor tax credit regime the formula includes a reduction for the amount of the supplementary dividend. This reduction maintains the rule against streaming of imputation credits to trust beneficiaries in the context of the foreign investor tax credit regime. Example: During an income year the trustees of the T Family Trust make the following distributions to beneficiaries: ▪ dividends of $12,000 distributed to Mrs T, there being attached to the dividends imputation credits of $2,400 ▪ capital of $5,000 and dividends of $2,000 distributed to Miss T, there being attached to the dividends imputation credits of $500 ▪ capital of $2,000 and interest of $3,000 distributed to Master T. It is apparent that $2,900 is the total amount of all imputation credits attached to dividends distributed to beneficiaries during the income year, and that $24,000 is the total amount of all distributions made to beneficiaries during the income year. Mrs T would include within assessable income an imputation credit calculated as follows: 2,900 ×  12,000 24,000  =  $1,450  Miss T would include within assessable income the amount of an imputation credit calculated as follows: 2,900 ×  7,000 24,000  =  $845.83  No calculation is made in relation to Master T because there was no distribution to him of dividends with an imputation credit attached. The effect of making these calculations is that an amount of credit equal to $604.17 is not included within the assessable incomes of beneficiaries.  This formula is not applied to a beneficiary who is an investor deriving category A income from a group investment fund. For imputation purposes the fund and the investor are treated as a company and as a shareholder, respectively. See also ¶25-105. Calculation of credits of a partner Where partnership income includes dividend income with credits attached the following formula is applied to calculate the amount of imputation credits included in assessable income: (partner’s income ÷ partnership income) × (partnership imputation credits − person’s supplementary dividend) where: partner’s income is the partner’s assessable income from the partnership for the tax year excluding all imputation credits attached to dividends which the partner derived during the tax year, and excluding a supplementary dividend derived by the person as a non-resident partner of the partnership partnership income is the assessable income jointly derived by the partners of the partnership for the tax year excluding all imputation credits attached to dividends which the partners derived during the tax year partnership imputation credits is the total amount of all imputation credits attached to dividends and total supplementary dividends derived by all of the partners during the tax year, and partner’s supplementary dividend is the total supplementary dividends for the tax year derived by the person as a nonresident partner of the partnership. See s LE 6(3). The effect of this formula is to pro-rate credits among partners according to each partner’s proportionate share of total income. See also ¶23-182–¶23-186.  Dividends from certain FIF interests An issue previously arose when a New Zealand-resident shareholder received a dividend with imputation credits attached that was paid from a closely held Australian company. The New Zealand resident’s investment in that company would generally be an attributing interest under the FIF rules. However, under the FIF rules, a New Zealand resident is taxed only on the deemed FIF income; the actual dividend is disregarded. Section LE 8B limits the amount of the tax credit to the shareholder receiving an imputed dividend from an Australian company to the amount of imputation credits they would have if the imputation credits were calculated on the basis of the resident’s FIF income from that company. In addition, s CV 19 ensures that the shareholder’s tax liability is calculated correctly in relation to the FIF income and imputation credits by providing that a person’s income includes the amount of imputation credits under s LE 8B. In the absence of s CV 19, a shareholder subject to s LE 8B would be under-taxed on their FIF income. Note that the section does not apply where the comparative value or deemed rate of return FIF calculation methods are used, as the amount of the imputation credits are already included under these methods. Imputation credit more than maximum permitted ratio Where an imputation credit attached to a dividend has an imputation ratio greater than the maximum permitted ratio based on the resident company income tax rate, the imputation credit is reduced to the maximum permitted amount. Unpaid income tax Where an imputation credit is attached to a dividend and: ▪ the dividend is paid by a company that has a debit balance in its imputation credit account at the end of the tax year, and ▪ the company had not paid further income tax by 31 March (for ICA closing debit balance)  then the imputation credit is reduced by the Commissioner in proportion to the amount of income tax paid. The Commissioner reduces proportionately the amount of the imputation tax credit attached to the dividend to reflect the amount of imputation credits that have been paid by the company. Evidential requirements In the case of an imputation credit not fully recognised because of a failure to provide evidence of the credit, the credit may be reduced to an amount that is recognised by the Commissioner. If a person who has a tax credit in s LE 1 does not meet the evidential requirements of s 78D of the Tax Administration Act 1994, the person’s credit may be reduced accordingly. Note that from 1 April 2020, only taxpayers who have not provided their tax file number to their investment income payer will have to provide the Commissioner with evidence of their tax credit. Credits are the subject of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage Where an imputation credit arises under an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage, it will be subject to the anti-avoidance provisions in ss GB 35–GB 36. The credit will be reduced by the amount the Commissioner determines is subject to the arrangement. Stapled stock The amount of any imputation credit attached to a dividend arising from a “stapled stock” arrangement, which is subject to the antiavoidance provision in s GB 37, is reduced to nil. See ¶17-115. Law: IT07 ss CV 19, LE 4–LE 11  ¶17-115 Anti-avoidance stapled stock “Stapled stock” arrangements are dealt with under s GB 37. Under such arrangements the New Zealand shareholders of, say, a nonresident company could be offered dividends from a New Zealand subsidiary of that company as an alternative to dividends from the  parent company. Of course, imputation credits would be attached to such dividends. Briefly, s GB 37 provides that if an arrangement is entered into whereby: ▪ a shareholder of the company or an associated person of the shareholder may be paid a dividend by another company, or ▪ a shareholder of the company or an associated person of the shareholder may acquire shares in another company so that the other company may pay a dividend to the shareholder, for the purposes of the imputation provisions, a dividend is treated as being paid by the company that entered into the arrangement. Also, the imputation credits attached to the dividend are treated as being a debit to that company’s imputation credit account (ICA) under s OB 30. There are also implications for the person receiving the dividend under the arrangement as follows: ▪ the imputation credits attached to the dividend do not constitute income of the recipient, and ▪ the imputation credits are not treated as an imputation credit for the purposes of s LE 1 (tax credits for imputation credits). In other words, an imputation credit attached is neither eligible as a credit of tax against the recipient’s income tax liability nor eligible for conversion and carry-forward as a tax loss or tax credit. Section GB 37 also extends to companies where the shareholder is a trustee of a trust, and a beneficiary of the trust or an associated person of the beneficiary may be paid the dividend or acquire the shares in the other company, as the case may be. The provision will still apply if any of the purposes of the arrangement falls within the above. The purpose of the arrangement to have another company pay a dividend to the shareholder,  beneficiary, or associated person of the shareholder or beneficiary does not need to be the dominant purpose. Example: Company A is a New Zealand resident company. Company A has incurred tax losses since its incorporation. The shareholders in Company A are all New Zealand residents. Company B is also a New Zealand resident company. Company B is a taxpaying company with imputation credits available to be attached to any dividends paid. The shareholders in Company B include New Zealand residents and nonresidents. Company A and Company B enter into an arrangement for Company B to pay a dividend to Company A’s shareholders, using the imputation credits which are unable to be used by Company B’s non-resident shareholders. This arrangement would fall within s GB 37. The dividend paid by Company B will be treated as being paid by Company A. Company A will be treated as having a debit arising to its ICA for the imputation credits attached to the dividend paid. Company A will therefore have a debit balance in its ICA and unless this balance is cleared by the end of the tax year, Company A will be liable for imputation penalty tax. Also, the shareholders in Company A who receive the dividend under the arrangement will not be entitled to claim the imputation credits attached as credits against their income. These credits are also excluded from the shareholders’ return (ie they are not income to the shareholders).  Shares for the purposes of these provisions can include a debenture complying with s FA 2. Law: IT07 ss GB 37, LE 1(5), OB 30(4)  ¶17-116 Taxing distributions from share-lending transactions Share-lending transactions occur when one party lends shares to another for a fee. Generally, such arrangements will constitute the sale and buy-back of the share with regular tax impost. However, specific share-lending rules allow “qualifying” share-lending transactions to be taxed on the basis of economic substance (ie treated as a loan) rather than legal form (sale of shares). Antiavoidance provisions are applicable to non-qualifying share-lending transactions.  A qualifying share-lending arrangement involves a “returning share transfer” which is an arrangement where the following apply: ▪ where an original share (before 1 July 2018, listed on an official list of a recognised exchange) is transferred from a share supplier to a share user ▪ where it is agreed that the share user (or associate) will pay a replacement payment to the share supplier (or associate) if a dividend is payable on the original share ▪ where it is agreed that the original share or an identical share may be transferred from the share user to the share supplier (or associate), and ▪ where it is not a warrant or an instalment receipt. Where the arrangement satisfies the criteria for a returning share transfer the arrangement will fall within the definition of a sharelending arrangement and there will be no tax on disposal. A share-lending arrangement is a returning share transfer entered into on or after 1 July 2006 where: ▪ the term of the returning share transfer is one year or less ▪ the terms are ordinary commercial terms such as would be agreed between arm’s length parties ▪ any RWT under s RE 17 for a replacement payment is paid ▪ the original shares (or identical shares) are returned to the share supplier during the agreed term (or such extended term as approved by the Commissioner), and ▪ the share user issues a credit transfer notice in respect to any dividends paid on the original share or establishes and maintains an ICA if a dividend is payable on the original share.  The imputation credit account rules recognise that under a sharelending arrangement the imputation credits remain with the economic owner of the shares (the share supplier). This is achieved by transferring the imputation credits to the share supplier and denying the share user a tax credit under s LE 1(2). A share user can either maintain an ICA in order to attach imputation credits to replacement payments or if the share user has received the underlying dividend they can issue a credit transfer notice. The form of a credit transfer notice is specified in s 30C of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Any imputation credit transferred under a credit transfer notice is excluded from the taxable income of the share user and instead becomes income of the share supplier. See s CD 17 and ¶16-630. Where no direct transfer of imputation credits is possible because, say, the original shares have been sold, the share user is obliged to pay RWT at the rate of 33%, refer to s RE 17 and sch 1, pt D, cl 5. This share-lending RWT gives rise to imputation credits attached to the replacement payment. See ¶15-067. Imputation credits received by a share supplier on a replacement payment are subject to the same treatment as normal imputation credits, regardless of whether they are allocated under s OB 64, arise from the share user paying RWT or from a credit transfer notice being issued. In the first two cases the credit arises on the date the replacement payment is paid and in the latter case, on the date the notice is issued. See ¶17-040. Debits to a share user’s ICA will arise when imputation credits are attached by the share user to a replacement payment, a credit transfer notice is issued or where the share user receives imputation credits in respect of a returning share transfer that is not a sharelending arrangement. See ¶17-045. Returning share transfer not a share-lending arrangement Where a returning share transfer does not qualify as a share-lending arrangement, the rules still operate to ensure that any imputation credits received by the share user in respect of the shares remain  with the economic owner of the shares (the share supplier). This is achieved by requiring the share user to enter a debit in their ICA for the amount of any imputation credits received in respect of dividends paid to the share user (or an associate). In addition, the share user is not entitled to a credit of tax for the imputation credits and the transfer of the shares itself is treated as a disposal for tax purposes. An anti-avoidance provision ensures that taxpayers do not attempt to structure transactions that fall outside the returning share transfer definition. See s GB 49. For further discussion and examples of the operation of the sharelending rules see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 86. Law: IT07 ss GB 49, LE 1(2), LE 7, OB 22, OB 49, OB 50, OB 64, YA 1; TAA s 30C  ¶17-120 Arrangements to obtain tax advantage Anti-avoidance provisions are contained in ss GB 35 and GB 36 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (IT07) and s 90AF of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). These provisions apply to arrangements to obtain a tax advantage in relation to imputation credits. For the purposes of this section a “tax advantage” is, among other things, the obtaining of a credit of tax by shareholders, or a credit to an imputation credit account (ICA) or Māori authority credit account. An arrangement to obtain a tax advantage may take one of two forms: ▪ the issue or sale of shares under s GB 35(2), or ▪ the allocation of credits either by way of streaming or attaching credits so as to give some persons higher credit values under s GB 35(3). Issue or sale of shares  A tax advantage will arise where there is an arrangement for the issue or sale or other disposition of shares and all of the following apply: ▪ There is an arrangement for the disposal or issue of shares. ▪ Any person who is a party to the arrangement might reasonably have anticipated that a dividend would be paid in respect of the shares in any income year and that attached to the dividend would be an imputation credit. ▪ Any person who is a party to the arrangement might reasonably expect that a party to the arrangement will or will not be able to obtain a tax advantage in relation to those credits. ▪ The purpose of the arrangement is that a party to the arrangement would obtain any such advantage. ▪ The purpose is not a merely incidental one. An arrangement to obtain a tax advantage will clearly exist where shares are sold with a view to obtaining access to imputation credits retained by the company whose shares are sold. It must be a purpose, and not merely an incidental purpose, of such an arrangement that there will be a tax advantage. In this way, s GB 35 is modelled on the general anti-avoidance provisions of ss BG 1 and GA 1. Allocation of credits The second type of arrangement will arise where a company streams the payment of dividends, or streams the attachment of credits to dividends, in such a way that higher credit values will be obtained by some persons. Section GB 35 reinforces the significance of the allocation and benchmark dividend rules. These rules require that any dividends paid during the tax years are equally imputed. Section GB 34 also addresses the situation where dividends are streamed to different  shareholders over more than one tax year, eg by using different benchmark ratios in different tax years. In determining whether some persons have obtained a higher credit value, a dividend paid by the company will be deemed to have a higher credit value than another dividend where one of the following applies: ▪ The dividend has an imputation credit attached to it while the other dividend does not. ▪ The imputation ratio of the dividend is higher than that of the other dividend. Application of s GB 36 This section applies to any arrangement for the issue of share or the sale or other disposition of shares (as described in s GB 35(2)) or to an arrangement involving the streaming of dividends (as described in s GB 35(3)). The consequences of such arrangements are as follows: ▪ shareholders are denied a credit of tax for the amount of imputation credit that the Commissioner determines is subject to the arrangement, and ▪ there is a debit of that amount to the ICA of any company that would otherwise obtain a credit to an ICA. Streaming dividends In relation to a tax advantage arrangement involving the streaming of the payment of dividends with credits attached, a further debit can arise to the ICA of the company paying the dividends. This is where that company is the only party to the arrangement. The Commissioner issues a determination showing the resulting debit to a company’s ICA in the light of the impugned arrangement. The debit is equal to the amount of imputation credit that the Commissioner determines to be the subject of the arrangement. The  determination can be the subject of a challenge in the normal manner. Shares for the purposes of these provisions can include a debenture complying with s FA 2. Imputation credit shopping There are rules to prevent imputation credit shopping. Briefly, this means that imputation credits earned by one group of companies cannot be paid to the shareholders of a different group of companies. The rules relating to imputation credit shopping apply to a company that leaves or joins a wholly-owned group of companies with total available net losses exceeding $1m. Broadly, the rules require that a payment of imputation additional tax be made by a company when it leaves or joins a wholly-owned group of companies. The rules have also been extended to cover transactions involving group companies that have transferred imputation credits — see ¶17-107. Section OB 72 provides that when a company that was part of a group joins a new wholly-owned group, the company is only liable for imputation additional tax if a group of people hold common voting interests in the new group that exceed 67% or more of the common voting interests in the former group. Previously, imputation additional tax was payable where there was any change in the ultimate shareholders of a wholly-owned group. Section OB 72B provides a mechanism for tracking shareholder changes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 84. The amount of the additional tax payment is calculated on the amount of a leaving company’s debit ICA balance. If there is no change in the ultimate owners of the wholly-owned group, the leaving company may elect to have its debit ICA balance debited to the ICA of another company in the group. Imputation additional tax must be paid by the 20th of the month after the month the company ceases to be a member of the former group. A company that is liable to pay imputation additional tax under s OB 72 is also liable to pay a special tax known as imputation penalty tax.  This tax is imposed at the rate of 10% on the amount of imputation additional tax payable. The due date for payment of imputation penalty tax is 20 June following the end of the tax year to which the penalty relates. A late payment penalty may apply for a late payment of imputation additional tax or imputation penalty tax. However, with effect from the 2018–19 income year, only the initial late payment penalty, and not the 1% monthly incremental late payment penalty, is payable on the imputation additional tax. However, the 1% monthly incremental late payment penalty still applies to imputation penalty tax (as it does not satisfy the definition of a “civil penalty” for the purposes of s 139B(2B)(e)). See ss OB 71, OB 72 and OB 72B for further details. Also see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 160 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10 November 2010 at 84. Law: IT07 ss GB 35, GB 36, LE 1(5), OB 13, OB 25, OB 44, OB 54, OB 71, OB 72, OB 72B, YA 1; TAA ss 90AF, 139B, 140B, 142E  TRANS-TASMAN IMPUTATION ¶17-200 Introduction to trans-Tasman imputation Triangular taxation occurs when New Zealand shareholders in an Australian company operating in New Zealand are unable to access New Zealand-sourced imputation credits. The same problem applies in reverse for Australian shareholders in New Zealand companies operating in Australia. In 2003, the New Zealand and Australian Governments reached a bilateral agreement on a solution to the problem of “trans-Tasman triangular taxation”. This entailed each country extending its imputation regime to include companies resident in the other country. Under the trans-Tasman imputation regime where an Australian company chooses to register under the New Zealand system, it is  permitted to maintain a New Zealand imputation credit account to record tax paid in New Zealand. This is in addition to its Australian franking account in which it will record tax paid in Australia. See ¶17210. The same will apply for any New Zealand companies that choose to enter the Australian imputation system. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 11, November 2003 at 30. Australian companies are permitted to maintain a New Zealand imputation credit account from 1 April 2003 and may attach New Zealand imputation credits to dividends paid with effect from 1 October 2003. The trans-Tasman imputation regime also includes a form of grouping for imputation purposes, which Australian companies may also participate in. For example, a company resident in New Zealand may form a group with one or more Australian companies for the purposes of the Australian dividend franking system. Imputation grouping allows any member of an imputation group to attach imputation credits to dividends paid, provided income tax has been paid by another group member in the same jurisdiction. See ¶17-240 and ¶17-245. Inland Revenue has information on the rules and links via its website at www.ird.govt.nz.  ¶17-210 Australian imputation credit account (ICA) company The trans-Tasman imputation system allows an Australian-resident company to elect to maintain an imputation credit account (ICA), ie to be an “Australian ICA company”. The election process is summarised below. A company that is not required under the general requirement (see ¶17-030) to establish an ICA may be eligible to maintain an ICA if the company is: ▪ resident in Australia  ▪ not a company excluded from maintaining an ICA by reason of s OB 1(2)(a)–(f), and ▪ not treated by a double tax agreement as being resident in a country that is not Australia. “Resident in Australia” is a defined term in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Generally, this means a company which is not resident in New Zealand but which would be resident in New Zealand under s YD 2 if “Australia” was treated as being “New Zealand” under the section. In other words, exchange “New Zealand” for “Australia” for the purpose of s YD 2. This test of residency is based on the Australian rules for determining the Australian residence of a company. The Australian ICA company is not required to be resident in New Zealand, as was the requirement before 1 April 2008. The election is made by giving notice to the Commissioner in a form acceptable to the Commissioner (form IR 488). Commissioner may decline election The Commissioner may decline to accept a notice of election if: ▪ a previous election by the company has been revoked by the Commissioner, and ▪ the company does not satisfy the Commissioner that the company has taken adequate steps to prevent the occurrence of situations of the type that gave rise to the revocation. Effective date of election — s OB 2(3) If accepted, the election to maintain an ICA is effective: ▪ for the purpose of attaching imputation credits to dividends paid on one of the following dates: □ the first day of the tax year in which the notice of election is received by the Commissioner if the company is formed or becomes eligible in the tax year and the Commissioner notifies the company of that date, or  □ if the above does not apply, 30 days after the date the notice of election is received by the Commissioner ▪ for the purpose of the other provisions in the imputation rules (eg debits and credits to the ICA), from the first day of the tax year in which the Commissioner is notified. Implications of election A company that makes an effective election to maintain an ICA must do so: ▪ for the purpose of attaching imputation credits to dividends paid, until the date on which the company ceases to be eligible to maintain the ICA or on which the election is revoked ▪ for all other purposes, for the tax year and for each subsequent tax year at the beginning of which the company is eligible to maintain the ICA and the election has not been revoked. In other words, the Australian ICA company will be subject to the general imputation rules. However, there are also a number of additional requirements — see ¶17-215–¶17-235. A company that is in a wholly-owned group of companies with an Australian ICA company may be jointly and severally liable with the Australian ICA company for further income tax, civil penalties and interest under Pt 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 that arise from a breach of the imputation rules by the Australian ICA company. This joint and several liability is subject to any prohibition by an independent regulatory body from having such liability. See s OB 2(4). Election may be revoked — s OB 2(7), (8) A company may revoke its election to maintain an ICA. The effective date of any notice of revocation by the company is: ▪ for the purpose of attaching imputation credits to dividends paid, from the date on which the Commissioner receives the notice  ▪ for all other purposes, from the last day of the tax year in which the Commissioner receives the notice. The Commissioner may revoke a company’s election to maintain an ICA by giving notice to the company. The Commissioner’s notice is effective from: ▪ for the purpose of attaching imputation credits to dividends paid, the date given in the notice ▪ for all other purposes, the last day of the tax year in which the date of the notice falls. Imputed dividends cannot be paid from the date the Commissioner receives the notice of revocation by the company, nor from the date the Commissioner states in his notice. The revocation of an election does not affect the obligations of a company that arise while the company is an ICA company. See s OB 2(9). Law: IT07 ss OB 2, YA 1  ¶17-215 Credits and debits to the Australian imputation credit account (ICA) An Australian imputation credit account (ICA) company must record debits and credits which are additional to those of a New Zealand ICA company. Credits The following credits arise in the ICA of an Australian ICA company: ▪ non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) withheld from non-resident passive income (see ¶26-440–¶26-450) ▪ non-resident contractors withholding tax (see ¶26-480) ▪ income tax payments for schedular income derived under s CR 3 (income of non-resident general insurer) or CV 16 (income of  non-resident shippers). These credits arise on the date the type of tax in question was withheld or paid. Only one credit entry is allowed for each of the above types of tax payment made. See s OB 4(5). If a payment is recorded as a credit in the ICA in accordance with ss OB 4–OB 26 (see ¶17-040), another credit will not be allowed under ss OB 27–OB 29. Debits An Australian ICA company must record as a debit in its ICA, any refund of: ▪ overpaid NRWT which has been credited to the ICA ▪ tax overpaid on schedular payments to non-resident contractors which has previously been credited to the ICA ▪ income tax overpaid for schedular income derived under derived under ss CR 3 and CV 16 (non-resident insurers and shippers), which has previously been credited to the ICA. These debits arise on the date on which the refund is paid. Law: IT07 ss OB 27–OB 29, OB 57–OB 59  ¶17-220 Australian ICA company — converting further income tax to loss In certain circumstances, an Australian imputation credit account (ICA) company may elect to convert a payment of further income tax into a tax loss. The tax loss may be used by a company in the same wholly-owned group as the Australian ICA company. The conversion of further income tax paid can be made when, at the time of payment of the further income tax, there is no possibility that the company will have a New Zealand income tax liability against which the payment may be credited. The amount of the tax loss available is calculated by dividing the amount of further income tax  paid (to the extent it is not required to meet a liability of the company) by the company tax rate. Example: Ozzie Ltd is an Australian ICA company and also part of a wholly-owned group of companies with Kiwi Ltd. Ozzie Ltd has a debit balance of $700 in its ICA at 31 March 20X3. Ozzie Ltd pays further income tax of $700 on 20 June 20X3. At that time, there is no possibility Ozzie Ltd will have a future income tax liability against which the payment of further income tax may be credited. Ozzie Ltd elects to convert the further income tax payment into a loss. The amount of tax loss available for offset by Kiwi Ltd in the 20X3–X4 income year is $2,500 ($700/0.28).  The reason for allowing the loss conversion is to stop the refund of the further income tax payment to another group company (assuming the group company has sufficient imputation credits in its ICA). This could happen if the further income tax payment was simply transferred to the other group company. Law: IT07 s OB 69  ¶17-225 Compliance requirements for an Australian ICA company The following is a summary of the additional compliance requirements that are placed on an Australian imputation credit account (ICA) company. Imputation return — s 69(2) An Australian ICA company which does not have to file a return of income for the tax year must file the annual imputation return by 31 July following the end of the tax year. For example, an Australian ICA company that is not required to file a tax return for the year ended 31 March 2018 must file its 2017–18 imputation return by 31 July 2018. If the Australian ICA company is required to file a tax return for the tax year, the imputation return must be filed by the time the tax return  is required to be filed. This is the same rule that applies for a New Zealand ICA company. See ¶17-080. Late filing penalty — ss 139A(4) and 142(1)(d) A late filing penalty of $250 is payable by an Australian ICA company which does not file its imputation return on time. The due date for payment of this penalty is the date specified by the Commissioner or the date by which the Australian ICA company is required to furnish the imputation return, whichever is the later. Note that the date specified by the Commissioner cannot be less than 30 days after the day on which the Commissioner has notified the company that the penalty is payable. Law: TAA ss 69(2), 139A, 142(1)(d)  ¶17-235 Imputation — dividends paid in Australian currency For the purposes of the imputation rules, a formula is provided to calculate the New Zealand dollar equivalent of the amount of a dividend that is paid in Australian currency. The formula is: a×b where: a is the amount of the dividend expressed in Australian dollars, and b is the close of trading spot exchange rate for the Australian dollar for the date on which the dividend is declared (if that date is no more than three months before the date the dividend is paid), or the date on which the dividend is paid (if the date of payment is more than three months after the date the dividend is declared). Shareholder dividend statement — s 29(1B) When paying a dividend, an Australian ICA company must use the term “New Zealand imputation credit” on the shareholder dividend  statement. See also ¶17-090. Company dividend statement Before 1 April 2020, for any payment of a dividend in Australian currency by an Australian imputation credit account company, the company dividend statement (see ¶17-085) had to show the exchange rate between the New Zealand dollar and the Australian dollar that was used to calculate the imputation ratio. However, note that the requirement for a company dividend statement to be provided was repealed with effect from 1 April 2020 (see ¶17-085). Law: IT07 s OB 60(6), (7); TAA s 29(1B)  ¶17-240 Imputation group of companies An imputation group of companies is designed to mitigate the problem that imputation credits cannot be passed through intermediate companies that are resident in neither Australia nor New Zealand. Imputation grouping enables any Australian or New Zealand company within a wholly-owned group to pay an imputed dividend, if tax has been paid or imputation credits have been received from companies outside the group by any Australian or New Zealand company within the group. In this case, there will be no need to pay a dividend up the chain of companies for the parent company to access imputation credits created further down the chain of companies. The imputation grouping rules are broadly based on the imputation rules for a consolidated group (see ¶20-070). Eligibility rules — s FN 4 Companies may form an imputation group. An imputation group must satisfy the following criteria: ▪ each member of the group is a company that is resident in New Zealand or Australia and:  □ is not treated by a double tax agreement as being resident in a country that is not Australia or New Zealand, and □ is required to maintain an imputation credit account (ICA) under s OB 1 or, in the case of an Australian-resident company, because of an election to maintain an ICA under s OB 2 ▪ the members of the group are a wholly-owned group of companies ▪ no member of the group is a qualifying company or all members of the group are qualifying companies ▪ no member of the group is a mineral miner that is a company or all members of the group are, and ▪ no member of the group has shares: □ that have been subject to an arrangement or series of related or connected arrangements, or □ had rights attaching to them that have been extinguished or altered (directly, or indirectly, by any means whatever) so as to defeat the intent and application of the imputation rules. This includes an arrangement for the purpose of enabling a company to be a member of the same imputation group as another member of the group. See s FN 4(5). Under s FN 4(2) a company that is a member of a consolidated group may also be a member of an imputation group if at the time: ▪ the imputation group satisfies or will satisfy all of the above criteria ▪ all the members of the consolidated group are or would be members of the imputation group, and  ▪ for an imputation group that contains or will contain members of more than one consolidated group, all of the consolidated groups have been part of a single wholly-owned group of companies throughout the period that: □ began on the earliest date on which there arose a credit that, at the time, remains uncancelled in the ICA of a consolidated group or imputation group, all of whose members are in the imputation group, and □ ended at the time. The effect of the last criterion listed above is that the credits in a consolidated group ICA must have the same shareholder continuity profile. Formation, entry and combination Generally, a notice of election must be given to the Commissioner to form an imputation group (form IR 473). All companies forming the imputation group must be 100% commonly owned. Any two or more companies that are not members of a consolidated group and are eligible to be members of an imputation group may give to the Commissioner a notice of election to form the imputation group. A company that is not a member of a consolidated group and is eligible to be a member of an existing imputation group may give to the Commissioner a notice of election to join the imputation group on form IR 475. An imputation group may not be formed with one member company. However, the group may continue to exist if the number of its members is reduced to one. A notice of election to form an imputation group must nominate one of the companies as agent of the imputation group for the purposes of the imputation rules. See further below under the heading “nominated company”.  All Australian companies electing to be part of an imputation group must also complete a trans-Tasman imputation election form (IR 488). A notice of election to form or join an imputation group has effect from the beginning of the tax year that contains the date on which the Commissioner receives the notice. If there are more than three companies forming the group, multiple IR 473 election notices will need to be completed and forwarded to the Commissioner. Membership An imputation group does not need to have Australian members. The group may consist only of New Zealand resident companies. Imputation groups with one or more Australian companies must also form a resident imputation subgroup. This subgroup is associated with a trans-Tasman imputation group. See ¶17-245. The members of this subgroup are the New Zealand resident members of the trans-Tasman group. A resident imputation subgroup can be formed and continue to exist with only one member however, if at any time the subgroup has no members, it will cease to exist. Liability of members A company that is a member of an imputation group is jointly and severally liable for: ▪ further income tax ▪ civil penalties, and ▪ interest under Pt 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 arising from the operation of the ICA of the imputation group. See s FN 9(3). Nominated company An imputation group must have a nominated company. The nominated company must be a member of the imputation group.  The nominated company for a trans-Tasman imputation group must be one of the New Zealand member-companies. This company is also the nominated company for the associated resident imputation subgroup. See ¶17-245. For the purposes of the imputation rules (s FN 6(3)), the nominated company at any time is the agent of the imputation group and of each company that is a member of the imputation group at that time. At any time, a nominated company may give notice to the Commissioner that the company is to cease to be the nominated company and that another company is to become the nominated company for that group. This notice has effect 30 days after the date on which the Commissioner receives the notice and may be given on form IR 475. See s FN 6(4). If, at any time during a tax year, an imputation group does not have a nominated company and a replacement nominated company has not been appointed, the companies in the group cease to be members of the group from the beginning of the tax year. See s FN 13. If the nominated company for an imputation group is liquidated and the other companies of the group select another company as a replacement, the replacement company is the nominated company for the group from the date of the liquidation. For this provision to apply, notice must be given to the Commissioner of the selection within 30 days after the date of the liquidation, or within such further period as the Commissioner may allow. See s FN 6(6). Leaving an imputation group Under s FN 10 a company that is a member of an imputation group ceases to be a member of that group if the company: ▪ gives to the Commissioner a written election that it will cease to be a member ▪ ceases to be eligible to be a member ▪ is not the nominated company and ceases to be eligible to be a member of the same imputation group as the nominated  company, or ▪ is a member of an imputation group that ceases to have a nominated company (however, see sub-heading “Nominated company” above). Notice to leave an imputation group may be given on form IR 475. Effective date of cessation If a company elects to cease to be a member, the company will cease to be a member of the imputation group from the beginning of the day specified in the notice of election. If the election does not specify a date, the company ceases to be a member of the imputation group from the beginning of the tax year in which the notice of election is received by the Commissioner or the time at which the company became a member of the group, whichever is the later. See s FN 11(2). If a company (not the nominated company) ceases to be eligible to be a member of the same group as the nominated company, the company will cease to be a member of the imputation group from the beginning of the day on which the company’s eligibility ceased, provided a valid election is made to this effect. A company makes a valid election if: ▪ the election is made by notice and in a form acceptable to the Commissioner ▪ the election is received by the Commissioner within 30 days after the date on which the company ceases to be eligible or within such further period as the Commissioner allows, and ▪ the Commissioner cannot reasonably conclude that an arrangement has been entered into for the purpose of enabling the company to make a valid election so as to defeat the intent and application of the imputation rules. If no valid election is made, cessation takes effect from the beginning of the tax year in which the company’s eligibility or entitlement  ceased. If a member ceases to be a member of an imputation group by virtue only of being liquidated, the effective date of cessation will not be backdated to the beginning of the tax year in which the liquidation occurred. See s FN 14. Law: IT07 ss FN 1–FN 14, HD 11(2)  ¶17-245 Trans-Tasman imputation group As mentioned in ¶17-240, an imputation group with Australian and New Zealand members must also form a resident imputation subgroup. This requirement ensures that New Zealand tax is paid on all dividends paid offshore. A “trans-Tasman imputation group” means an imputation group that has at least one member that is not an Australian imputation credit account (ICA) company (see ¶17-210) and at least one member that is an Australian ICA company. In other words, the group consists of both New Zealand and Australian resident companies. A “resident imputation subgroup” means the New Zealand companies in the trans-Tasman imputation group. The subgroup may be formed and continue to exist with one member company. The resident imputation subgroup operates as a subset of, and is additional to, a trans-Tasman imputation group. Example: How a trans-Tasman imputation group and a resident imputation subgroup will work OZ Co 1, NZ Co 1 and NZ Co 2 are all part of a wholly owned group of companies and wish to form a trans-Tasman imputation group.  As the group contains Australian and New Zealand members, it is a trans-Tasman imputation group and the New Zealand members, NZ Co 1 and NZ Co 2, must also form a resident imputation subgroup. Both groups start the tax year with a zero balance in their respective consolidated imputation credit accounts. NZ Co 1 then pays to OZ Co 1: ▪ $70 dividend, and ▪ a $12.35 supplementary dividend with: ▪ $12.35 of non-resident withholding tax deducted, and ▪ imputation credits of $17.65 attached. On paying the supplementary dividend, NZ Co 1 receives a foreign investor tax credit of $12.35. Looking first at the dividend coming from the New Zealand company, the imputation credits attached and the foreign investor tax credit create debits to both the transTasman imputation group consolidated imputation credit account and the resident imputation subgroup’s consolidated imputation credit account. Payment of dividend from NZ Co 1 — imputation entries  Secondly, regarding the receipt of the dividend by OZ Co 1 with $12.35 non-resident withholding tax deducted and $17.65 imputation credits attached. Credits are made only to the trans-Tasman imputation group consolidated imputation credit account as the receipt of the dividend relates only to the Australian company OZ Co 1. Receipt of dividend by OZ Co 1 — imputation entries  No other transactions take place throughout the tax year. At the end of the year the resident imputation subgroup’s consolidated imputation credit account has a debit balance of $30, so further income tax of $30 is payable. When the further income tax is paid, a credit arises to both consolidated imputation credit accounts. The trans-Tasman imputation group consolidated imputation credit account now has a credit balance of $30 which can be distributed to the ultimate shareholders. This is the right result as $30 of New Zealand tax has been paid. Payment of further income tax by the resident imputation subgroup — imputation entries  Source: Adapted from the Commentary to the Taxation (Annual Rates, GST, TransTasman Imputation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, pp 41–43.  For discussion of the FITC rules see ¶26-500. Law: IT07 ss FN 8, OP 4  ¶17-250 Consolidated imputation groups The imputation credit account (ICA) provisions in the Income Tax Act 2007 for a consolidated group of companies (see ¶20-010) also accommodate an imputation group (see ¶17-240). A “consolidated imputation group” is defined in s YA 1 as: ▪ an imputation group ▪ a resident imputation subgroup, and ▪ a consolidated group, no member of which is a member of an imputation group. By implication, the term also includes a trans-Tasman imputation group (see ¶17-245). This is because a trans-Tasman imputation group is a type of imputation group. The main features of a consolidated imputation group are summarised below.  Imputation credit accounts Imputation group If an existing consolidated group that is a consolidated imputation group elects to form an imputation group with another company or companies (and the other company or companies are not members of another consolidated group), the imputation group must continue to use and maintain the ICA formerly used by the consolidated group. In other words, the existing ICA for the consolidated group becomes the ICA for the consolidated imputation group. See s OP 3(1). Consolidated imputation group If an existing consolidated group that is a consolidated imputation group elects to form or join an imputation group that includes the members of another consolidated group, the resulting imputation group must record the following in its ICA: ▪ all of the debits and credits that, immediately before the election takes effect, are recorded in the ICA of the consolidated group, and ▪ all of the debits and credits that, when or after the election takes effect, arise from transactions involving a member of the imputation group. See s OP 3(2). Imputation subgroup The resident imputation subgroup (see ¶17-245) of a trans-Tasman imputation group must record in its ICA all of the debits and credits that: ▪ are recorded in the ICA of the trans-Tasman imputation group, and ▪ arise in relation to a company that, at the time the debit or credit arises: □ will be a member of the resident imputation subgroup if the debit or credit arises before the formation of the resident  imputation subgroup, and □ is a member of the resident imputation subgroup if the debit or credit arises at or after the formation of the resident imputation subgroup. See s OP 4(1), (2). In other words, all entries to the imputation account from the New Zealand members of a trans-Tasman imputation group go to the resident imputation group, whether or not they could be considered to be “transactions”. The opening balance of the ICA is an amount equal to the sum of the opening balances of each company that is part of the resident imputation subgroup. See s OP 4(3). See example in ¶17-245. Imputation group ceases and consolidated imputation group formed If, by election, the members of an imputation group cease to be an imputation group and form a consolidated group that is a consolidated imputation group, the consolidated group must continue to use and maintain the ICA formerly used by the imputation group. The opening balance of the ICA of a consolidated imputation group is: ▪ nil, if the consolidated imputation group is formed during the tax year and is not formed from the members of a consolidated imputation group that exists immediately before the time of the formation ▪ the amount stated in accordance with ss OA 7, OP 3 and OP 4, if the consolidated imputation group is formed during the imputation year and is formed from the members of a consolidated imputation group that exists immediately before the time of the formation, or ▪ in any other case, the closing balance of the ICA for the preceding tax year.  ▸ Note: Use of pre-consolidation imputation credits The Commissioner’s view and practice is that the current s OP 22 has always required a consolidated imputation group to exhaust all its group imputation credits before it can draw on the preconsolidation credits of the individual group companies. However, this view has been contested by stakeholders from the private sector who have argued, in particular, that the general legislative framework for individual companies requires imputation credits to be used on a FIFO basis. As a result, an amendment has been proposed in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020. Under the proposed amendment, a consolidated imputation group will be able to use pre-consolidation imputation credit balances in a group company’s ICA before it uses group credits. This means that imputation credits generally will be used on a FIFO basis, which is in line with the wider imputation framework. To be used by the consolidated imputation group, the preconsolidation imputation credit balance of the group company must exist at the date of the debit to the group ICA (so shareholder continuity must be satisfied for the amount to be transferred). The amount of the credit balance that can be transferred from group companies to the group will be limited to the amount of the group’s imputation debit. This is because, when an imputation credit is transferred from a group company’s ICA to the consolidated imputation group’s ICA, the date for the credit becomes the day of the credit transfer, rather than the day the tax was paid. Consequently, if the credit transfer were not limited to the consolidated imputation group’s debit, credits could be carried forward that would (and should) otherwise have been extinguished due to changes in shareholder continuity calculated by reference to the date the credit originally arose. It is intended that the proposed amendment will apply retrospectively for the 2008–09 and later income years.  Credits and debits to the consolidated imputation credit account If a consolidated imputation group has a member that is an Australian ICA company any: ▪ NRWT withheld from non-resident passive income ▪ tax withheld from schedular payments made to non-resident contractors, and ▪ tax on schedular income derived by non-resident shippers and non-resident insurers paid by the Australian ICA company is credited to the ICA for the consolidated imputation group when it is withheld or paid. However, a credit arising from any of these payments cannot be recorded twice. If a consolidated imputation group has a member that is an Australian ICA company, any refunds of these types of taxes are recorded as a debit to the ICA for the consolidated imputation group when the refund is paid. See ss OP 25–OP 27 and OP 48–OP 50. Income tax refunds Historically, a tax refund due to a company that is a member of an imputation group had to be applied for in writing by the company. The limitation that, generally, the refund cannot exceed the credit balance in the company’s ICA (see ¶17-105) applies to the company as if: ▪ the ICA of the imputation group were the ICA of the company, and ▪ the credit in the ICA for the purpose of s RM 13 were reduced by each refund to a member of the imputation group. This provision effectively requires each company in the imputation group to monitor its own compliance. See s OP 6. Imputation return  Generally, the nominated company must file an annual imputation return when the consolidated imputation group: ▪ ceases to be a consolidated imputation group ▪ ceases to be an imputation group and becomes a consolidated group that is a consolidated imputation group, or ▪ ceases to be a consolidated imputation group and becomes an imputation group. The nominated company for a resident imputation subgroup is not required to file an annual imputation return in respect of the group for a tax year, unless the group has been liable for a payment of further income tax or imputation penalty tax. See s 74(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Law: IT07 ss OA 7, OP 1–OP 50, YA 1; TAA s 74  COMPANY TAX LOSSES Objectives of company tax loss provisions  ¶18-010  Proposed changes to company tax loss provisions ¶18-012 Loss Carry-forward and Offset  ¶18-015  Continuity of Shareholding  ¶18-023  Mining Losses  ¶18-045  Grouping Tax Losses  ¶18-050  ¶18-010 Objectives of company tax loss provisions The objectives of the rules relating to tax losses are threefold. They provide for loss balances to be carried forward (or, in certain circumstances, back) and subtracted from net income in future (or past) income years; they limit the circumstances in which loss balances can be carried forward and utilised based on a continuity of ownership test; and they provide for the circumstances in which a loss company may make a net loss available to another company in the current or a future income year. Law: IT07 Pt I, s BC 4(4)  ¶18-012 Proposed changes to company tax loss provisions In April 2020, as part of the measures announced to provide relief for businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic, changes were proposed to the company tax loss provisions. The two primary changes proposed were a tax loss carry-back scheme and a loosening of the tax loss continuity rules. Tax loss carry-back scheme  A temporary tax loss carry-back scheme was enacted as part of the COVID-19 Response (Taxation and Other Regulatory Urgent Measures) Act 2020 on 30 April 2020. The loss carry-back mechanism enables a business entity to offset a loss in a particular tax year against a profit in a previous year, resulting in a refund of the tax paid in the previous profitable year. This gives cash to businesses that are, or anticipate being, in loss. See further at ¶18-016 A permanent version of the scheme, applying to the 2021–22 and later income years, is intended to be included in a later tax bill introduced after public consultation has been carried out. Loosening of the tax loss continuity rules It is intended that the tax loss continuity rules will be relaxed, with the expectation that this will lead to an increase in physical/financial capital. The details of the changes will be included in a tax bill introduced in the second half of 2020. The new rules will apply for 2020–21 and later income years and will be modelled on the Australian rules with the introduction of a “same or similar business” test, meaning the business must continue in the same or a similar way it did before the ownership changed. With the impact of COVID-19, some companies will be looking to raise capital to keep afloat now and to recover in the future. Raising capital may result in a change to the existing shareholder structure. Relaxing the rules is intended to ensure companies in this position can carry losses forward to offset income when they return to profit. In addition, being able to carry forward losses will make businesses more valuable to investors and should improve access to capital for businesses. Example A start-up firm, Conference in the Clouds Limited (CIC) offers microphone and webcam software. It has been making large losses in recent years. However, it now wants to scale up significantly, given that more people are working from home and using videoconferencing.  Despite its promising early-development software, banks are unwilling to lend to CIC without it having a firm revenue base. CIC has approached several investors and has received an offer from a video conferencing company, Cloudcon Limited (Cloudcon), to inject millions of dollars into CIC in return for a 75% stake in the business. CIC wants to accept the investment but is wary of losing the value of its losses, which would be extinguished under the current shareholder continuity test. The government's new ‘same or similar business’ test ensures that CIC can take on the new investor without losing its losses because its business will be of a same or similar nature as the business it was carrying on when it made the losses. Given this, the price CIC’s owners receive for the 75% equity stake is higher (the business receives a greater capital injection) as the ability to carry forward losses makes the business more valuable to investors. Example from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 23 April 2020  LOSS CARRY-FORWARD AND OFFSET ¶18-015 Carry-forward of company loss balances A company may carry forward a loss balance for offset against net income derived in subsequent tax years, provided shareholder continuity requirements are satisfied (see ¶18-023) and subject to the restriction referred to in ¶18-017. There is no time limit for carrying forward a loss balance. Consequently, where the amount cannot be used, the loss balance is carried forward from that tax year to the next one and deducted from any net income derived by the company. This process will continue for succeeding tax years until the loss balance is extinguished. If a company carries forward a loss balance incurred in two or more tax years, that loss balance must be subtracted from net income in the order in which its tax loss components occurred. This means that each tax loss component must be traced to determine whether it can be carried forward. A tax loss component is the net loss for the tax year, certain other types of loss in s IA 2(4) and any unused tax loss component from an earlier year. As outlined in ¶18-023, any direct or indirect change in shareholding may have a bearing on whether a loss balance from a previous income year may be carried forward. Specific anti-avoidance rules  apply to prevent the manipulation of rights attaching to shares to meet the terms of the loss carry-forward rules. See s GB 3. A loss balance arising from a loss incurred in the production of exempt income is not available for carry-forward. Note that a multi-rate PIE may not carry forward a loss balance unless it has chosen to pay provisional tax. See ¶29-135. Law: IT07 ss BC 4(4), GB 3, IA 1, IA 2, IA 9  ¶18-016 Carry-back of company losses In April 2020, a temporary loss carry-back scheme was introduced to support taxpayers in dealing with the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The scheme applies to losses incurred in the 2019–20 or 2020–21 income years and allows these losses to be carried back one year to be offset against profits made in the preceding income year and thereby receive a refund of the excess tax paid. Details of the scheme, contained in s IZ 8, are set out below. Eligibility Any business expecting a loss in either the 2019–20 or 2020–21 income year may be eligible to use the scheme. The scheme is not confined to companies and applies to persons conducting their business through other entities, such as a trust, partnership, lookthrough company or sole trader, that incur losses that can be carried back. Qualifying individuals, ie those who derive only reportable income (see ¶2-016), and multi-rate PIEs are not eligible to use the scheme. To be eligible to make an election under s IZ 8, a person must have made, or estimate that they will make, a loss in the 2019–20 or 2020–21 income year (the “net loss year”). The person must also have had taxable income remaining (after deducting the amount of tax credits for charitable donations) in the previous year, ie the 2018–19 or 2019–20 income year (the “taxable income year”).  Where the person is a company, shareholder continuity requirements must be satisfied for the offset ownership period, being the two-year period of the taxable income year and the net loss year, or part thereof. Where only part-year losses are claimed because of a shareholder continuity breach, adequate accounts must be kept for the relevant part year. The shareholder continuity requirements are the same as those for the carrying forward of losses (see ¶18-023, ¶18-025 and ¶18-030). In short, if a company has had an ownership change of more than 49% since the beginning of the taxable income year (the profit year), the loss carry-back will not be available, except on a part-year basis. This is to prevent the use of losses to eliminate tax on income that was not connected with the loss-making business when it was earned. Similarly, if group companies take advantage of the loss carry-back scheme, they are subject to the grouping rules for tax losses (see ¶18-050 and ¶18-060). All companies in a group must be 66% commonly owned from the beginning of the profit year to the end of the year of loss if a loss company carries back its loss to offset against the income of other group companies (with provision made for part periods). Specific anti-avoidance rules apply to prevent the manipulation of rights attaching to shares to meet the terms of the loss carry-back scheme. See ss GB 3B and GB 4 and below. Amount of loss Losses can only be carried back one year from a net loss year to a taxable income year. This means: ▪ losses from the 2019–20 year can only be carried back to the 2018–19 year, and ▪ losses from the 2020–21 year can only be carried back to the 2019–20 year. There is no ability to carry back losses from the 2020–21 year to the 2018–19 year. The amount that can be carried back is the smallest of:  ▪ the net loss (in 2019–20 or 2020–21) before adjusting for the carry-back ▪ the taxable income in the previous year (2018–19 or 2019–20) before adjusting for the carry-back, or ▪ the amount elected by the person. In other words, the amount that may be carried back is the lesser of the profit in the earlier year or the loss in the later year, unless the person elects a smaller amount. If a company is within a wholly-owned group of companies, only the amount that cannot be offset against profits within the wholly-owned group is able to be carried back. Refunds Taxpayers can make their election to carry back a loss by including the amount as an available tax loss in calculating their taxable income for the taxable income year in— ▪ their tax return for the taxable income year, or ▪ their request for an amended assessment of the taxable income year under s 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Any overpaid tax will then be refunded. The time bar has been extended to allow the Commissioner to amend the assessment for the taxable income year, ie the profit year, at the same time as the loss year assessment is amended: s 113G. In addition, if a taxpayer is in profit for the 2019–20 income year and estimates it will be in loss in the 2020–21 income year, it can choose to re-estimate its 2019–20 provisional tax by taking into account the estimated loss carry-back deduction. The deadline for re-estimating provisional tax has been extended, so that the taxpayer can do this at any time up to the earlier of: ▪ the day the 2019–20 tax return is filed, or  ▪ the day the 2019–20 tax return is due. Overpaid provisional tax will then be refunded. Shareholder-employees who have paid provisional tax on the basis they would receive a shareholder salary in the 2019–20 year may also re-estimate their provisional tax if their company is going to claim a loss carry-back that will reduce their shareholder salary. Any refund arising from a loss carry-back is not able to be applied by Inland Revenue towards any other tax debt the taxpayer may have: s RM 10(4). Note that any actual refund of tax for a company will only be available to the extent of imputation credits held in the company (see ¶17-105). Inland Revenue has stated that taxpayers planning to use the loss carry-back scheme must advise Inland Revenue of their intent to do so. This includes shareholder-employees planning to re-estimate their provisional tax. Use of money interest As a claim for a loss carry-back may require estimating how much a future-year loss will be, it is possible that the amount of loss carried back is more than the actual available tax loss, resulting in underpaid tax. In this case, the standard use of money interest rules will apply. Note that where the use of money interest rules apply because of the over-estimation of the loss carry-back, the taxpayer cannot use the special provision for the remission of interest for taxpayers affected by COVID-19 in s 183ABAB of the TAA. Effect on other obligations Where profits have been distributed by way of shareholder-employee salaries or a dividend, this cannot be reversed to take advantage of a loss carry-back. In addition, where a subvention payment has been made this cannot be reversed to take advantage of a loss carryback.  Ring-fenced rental losses cannot be included in a loss that is carried back. A loss carry-back does not affect a person’s family income or their adjusted net income, so will not change Working for Families payments or student loan repayments. However, if a person receives or pays child support, the amount of child support may be affected by a loss carry-back, as with any other change to income. Specific anti-avoidance provisions Section GB 3B and an amended s GB 4 provide for specific antiavoidance rules in relation to the carry back of losses. The provisions require: ▪ that a company share is subject to an arrangement (which includes an arrangement directly or indirectly altering rights attached to the shares) ▪ the arrangement allows the relevant company to meet the requirements of the temporary loss carry-back regime, and ▪ a purpose of the arrangement is to defeat the intent and application of the regime. Where these requirements are met, the company is treated as not meeting the requirements of s IZ 8 and is unable to carry back the loss. Interpretation statement The Commissioner has released an interpretation statement IS 20/03, “Income Tax – Sections GB 3B and GB 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007 – Temporary loss carry-back regime” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 58), which sets out the Commissioner’s view of the application of the specific anti-avoidance provisions and contains a number of examples. The statement summarises the Commissioner’s position as follows: “3. A share will be ‘subject to an arrangement’ if the share or the rights attached to the share are the subject matter of the  arrangement. An ‘arrangement’ embraces all kinds of concerted action by which persons may arrange their affairs for a particular purpose or to produce a particular effect. It may involve more than one transaction or document and includes all steps and transactions by which it is carried into effect. 4. The arrangement must ‘allow’ (ie, permit or enable) a company to obtain or maintain compliance with the ownership continuity or ownership commonality requirements during the relevant period, as required by s IZ 8. 5. If, objectively determined, the effect of the arrangement is that it defeats the intent and application of the temporary loss carryback regime, then that will be a ‘purpose’ of the arrangement. 6. The temporary loss carry-back regime concerns the treatment and use of tax losses. In general terms, rules around the use of tax losses are intended to ensure that the economic benefit of tax losses can only be obtained by the same people who effectively bore the direct economic burden of the losses. 7. The Commissioner considers that the test as to whether an arrangement ‘defeats the intent and application’ of the temporary loss carry-back regime is, in effect, the same test as the parliamentary contemplation test under the general antiavoidance provision (s BG 1), as set out by the Supreme Court in Ben Nevis Forestry Ventures Ltd v CIR [2008] NZSC 115. Both tests are aimed at arrangements that in legal substance satisfy the requirements of a particular provision or regime, but when viewed in a commercial and realistic way, make use of (or circumvent) the provision or regime in a manner that is inconsistent with the provision or regime’s purpose.” It is also stated: “52. …The 49% ownership continuity requirement and the 66% ownership commonality requirement for grouping losses currently apply to prevent the use of losses by persons who were not connected in the way contemplated by the legislation with the loss-making business when the losses were incurred.  The availability of relief under the temporary loss carry-back regime is subject to the same tests during the ‘offset ownership period’ (as defined in s IZ 8(1)). 53. The intent and application of the temporary loss carry-back regime will be defeated by an arrangement that allows losses (and relief) to be claimed by businesses where, viewing the arrangement in terms of its commercial and economic reality, the required connection has not been or will not be maintained when comparing the loss year to the profit year.” Examples A number of examples can be found in Inland Revenue’s “COVID-19 – Your questions answered”, 19 May 2020, including: Example 1: Self-employed individuals Kreshma is a self-employed hairdresser and has been unable to operate during the COVID-19 lockdown. As a result, Kreshma’s hairdressing business made a loss of $10,000 for the year ended 31 March 2020. Kreshma’s hairdressing business had made a taxable profit of $55,000 for the year ended 31 March 2019 and accordingly Kreshma chooses to carry back her 2020 loss to the 2019 income year. The amendment of her 2019 tax return can be made by making a s 113 request in writing or amending the return via myIR to obtain a refund of tax. Kreshma chooses to amend her 2019 return via myIR as she knows this is the fastest way of receiving a refund.  Example 2: Limited to income in preceding year The Daily Story Ltd is an online media site that publishes daily news articles and lifestyle stories with a focus on New Zealanders. It proved to be very popular for the year ended 31 March 2019 and made a taxable profit of $140,000. However, The Daily Story Ltd has suffered a number of setbacks in the 2020 income year, both as a result of COVID-19 and also due to unrelated pressures facing the media industry. For the year ended 31 March 2020, The Daily Story Ltd made a tax loss of $180,000. The limit of the loss carry-back is the lesser of the loss made in the 2020 year and the profit in the 2019 year, so The Daily Story Ltd can only carry back $140,000 of the loss. The $40,000 excess balance can be carried forward as usual to the 2021 year to offset against future profits of the company. There must also be sufficient ICA credits available to allow the refund to be issued.  Example 3: Losses in the 2020–21 tax year Wiki Wiki Hospitality Limited (Wiki) has had a profitable year for the year ended 31 March 2020. It has not yet finalised its tax return, but it is expected to return $2m net income. Its final provisional tax payment for the expected $2m income is coming up on May 7, where it expects to pay $250,000 in tax (it has already paid $310,000 in early provisional tax instalments). However, because of COVID-19, it is not operating at the moment and does not know when it will be allowed to resume operating. It is still paying its staff (supported by the wage subsidy scheme) and rent. It seems inevitable that it will make a loss in the year ended 31 March 2021. In early May, the directors meet with the CFO and forecast some scenarios. In all the scenarios, Wiki will make a loss of $1.5m for the year ended 31 March 2021, although some scenarios see it making a $2m loss. Knowing it will face use-of-money-interest charges if it over-estimates its loss, Wiki decides to carry back the more certain loss of $1.5m to the 2019–20 year and reestimate its income for that year to $500,000 (down from $2m). Because it has already paid $310,000 in tax, it pays nothing on May 7 and receives a refund of $170,000 from its earlier provisional tax payment. In short, for the 2019–20 year, Wiki returns $500,000 of income and pays $140,000 tax, receiving back its earlier payments as refunds.  More information on the temporary loss carry-back scheme can be found on the Inland Revenue website. Law: IT07 ss GB 3B, IC 9, IZ 8, RC 7(3B), RM 10(4); TAA ss 3, 113G  ¶18-017 Restriction against using tax losses for schedular tax liabilities A taxpayer may not take a tax loss into account in calculating their schedular income tax liability for the following classes of schedular income: ▪ non-resident passive income subject to a final withholding tax ▪ income derived by a non-resident shipper ▪ income derived by a non-resident general insurer, and ▪ schedular policyholder base income.  Section BC 7 must be read subject to this restriction. Other schedular income, such as Category A income arising from a group investment fund and income derived by a multi-rate PIE, is not subject to the restriction. Law: IT07 ss BC 7, IA 8, YA 1  ¶18-018 Interposed entities — restriction against using tax losses A restriction against the use of carried-forward losses by an “interposed entity” applies when calculating net income for the attribution rule for income from personal services. Net income derived by an interposed entity from personal services must be attributed to the person who performed those services. See ¶33-325. While carried-forward loss balances arising from personal services may be taken into account when determining the net income to be attributed, it appears that loss balances carried forward from other activities may not be. Law: IT07 s GB 29(1)  CONTINUITY OF SHAREHOLDING ¶18-023 Shareholder continuity requirement to carry forward losses Very broadly, a company can carry forward a tax loss component of a loss balance only if at all times during the period from the beginning of the year of loss to the end of the year of carry-forward (the continuity period) a group of persons holds an aggregate of at least 49% of the minimum voting interests in the company. See ¶16145. If, during this continuity period, a market value circumstance exists (see ¶16-170) in respect of the loss company, the same group of persons must also hold at least 49% of the minimum market value interests in the loss company throughout the continuity period.  Overall, the intention is to ensure that only those shareholders who incurred the net losses (either directly or indirectly) are entitled to benefit from those net losses in future years. The lowest percentage voting or market value interest held by each shareholder during the continuity period is used to determine if shareholder continuity requirements are satisfied. A share in a company is held by the person whose name is entered in the share register as the holder: BHL v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-088. Example: Loss Co incurs a net loss for the year ended 31 March 20X2. Its voting interests are held as follows: Lesle y 20  John 15  Matthew 25  David 40  Loss Co  At the end of the 20X2–X3 income year, Loss Co wishes to carry forward the 20X1– X2 loss balance. Its voting interests as at 31 March 20X3 are: Lesley  John  Matthew  James  30  10  10  50  John and Matthew have each sold a 5% holding to James and David has sold his 40% holding to James. James now holds 50%. Matthew has also sold a 10% holding to Lesley. To establish whether there is a sufficiently high percentage for the 20X1–X2 tax loss component of its loss balance to be carried forward, Loss Co draws up the following table: Voting interest 1/4/X1  Voting interest 31/3/X3  Lowest voting interest  Lesley  20  30  20  John  15  10  10  Matthew  25  10  10  David  40  —  —  James  —  50  — 40%  In this case, Loss Co could not carry forward its 20X1–X2 tax loss component of its loss balance to the 20X2–X3 tax year as it fails to meet the 49% continuity of voting interests test.  Law: IT07 s IA 5  ¶18-025 Carry forward of part-year net losses incurred after continuity breach When shareholder continuity has been breached part-way through an income year, any net loss incurred by the company that is attributable to the part-period of the year after the change in shareholding is a loss balance that may be carried forward by the company. To be carried forward: ▪ the 49% continuity requirement must be satisfied from the date of ownership change until the end of the carry-forward year ▪ there must be an overall net loss for the year of ownership change, not just for the post-continuity breach period, and ▪ the amount of the part-year loss may not exceed the amount of the net loss for the entire loss year. This rule is generally applicable to companies formed part-way through an income year that incur a net loss in the period to the end of the income year. Adequate financial statements must be prepared and given to the Commissioner calculating the amount of the net loss attributable to that part-year. Example: Standard balance date company 1/4/X  31/3/X  31/3/X3  31/3/X4  1  2 loss $2m  loss for year $1m loss $0.6  loss $0.4m  30/9/X2 There is at least a 52% change of shareholding on 30 September 20X2. Consequently, continuity is breached. The loss balance carried forward to the 20X2– X3 income year will be nil. However, the loss balance carried forward to the 20X3–X4 income year will be $0.4m.  Law: IT07 ss IP 3(4), (5), IP 6(1)  ¶18-030 Carry forward of part-year net losses incurred before continuity breach When shareholder continuity is breached during a tax year, any losses incurred in a previous tax year can be carried forward to that income year and subtracted from any current part-year net income attributable to the period before the change in shareholding. Relief from the general shareholder continuity requirements will only apply to the relevant current part-year period and will not extend to later periods. Adequate accounts must be given to the Commissioner relating to the part-year net income and must set out the amount of that net income attributable to that part-year. Example: Standard balance date company 1/4/X 1  31/3/X2 net loss $10,000  31/3/X3 net income $4,000  net income $12,000  1/8/X2 67% change in shareholding  The $10,000 loss balance for the 20X1–X2 income year may be carried forward and subtracted from the $4,000 net income derived in the 20X2–X3 income year (this being the amount derived up to the date of breach of continuity). However, the remaining $6,000 of the loss balance cannot be utilised or carried forward.  Law: IT07 ss IP 3(2), (3), IP 6(1)  MINING LOSSES ¶18-045 Losses of mineral miners and petroleum miners Special provisions cater for the carry-forward of loss balances from mining and petroleum prospecting, exploration, development and operational expenditure in a mining permit area. Effectively, net losses arising from such activities may be carried forward and subtracted from future net income, even though the general continuity provisions are not met. This treatment is permitted to the extent that the loss balance does not exceed net income subsequently derived from the same mining permit area. A company may subtract the amount of a net mining loss from other income that is not attributable to the mining permit area, but only if all the requirements under ss GB 3 and IA 5 are met for the entire continuity period: see s IS 2(5). Mineral mining companies may access the tax losses of other members of the same group of companies. However, another member may not access the mineral miner’s losses. Law: IT07 subpart IS, s IA 7(7)  GROUPING TAX LOSSES ¶18-050 Introduction to rules for grouping tax losses A company may make its tax loss available for subtraction from the net income of another group company. There are two mechanisms for grouping tax. The first is for the loss company to make an  election in its tax return for the tax loss to be made available to the profit company. The second is for the profit company to agree to bear the amount of the loss company’s tax loss and in return make a subvention payment to the loss company. See ¶18-060. Where a company has a loss balance that has been carried forward from an earlier year, that carried forward loss balance must first be used to offset that company’s own net income in the relevant year before the grouping rules can be applied. Grouping losses and ability to claim foreign tax credits When a company makes an election to group its losses, it must be aware that it cannot also claim foreign tax credits. Example 1: A company that had nil tax to pay after utilising tax losses made available within its group was not entitled to a tax credit on tax paid in Australia. The taxpayer company derived its income from interest and consulting fees. It claimed a tax credit for $1,004 in tax paid in Australia on interest earned. The High Court held that by grouping losses against its assessable income, the taxpayer had arranged its affairs so that there was no New Zealand tax payable in respect of income earned on the Australian investment. Had the taxpayer chosen not to group losses equal to the income earned, there would have been room for the credit. However, because the taxpayer’s taxable income was nil, no tax was payable in respect of the Australian income. Therefore, the credit to which the taxpayer was entitled was also nil. See Charity Finance Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,565.  Rules for grouping tax losses The rules on the grouping of tax losses are designed to restrict the ability of companies that are not members of the same tax loss source group from benefiting from those tax losses. The intention is to limit the circumstances in which a company with a net loss for a tax year, or a loss balance that is able to be carried forward in that tax year, may offset part or the whole of that net loss against the net income of another company. Grouping of losses is limited to those circumstances where at all times during the income year in which the net loss arises, and all the succeeding income years up to and including the year in which the net loss was made available, the loss  company and the other company were, at least to the extent of 66%, commonly owned. A loss company is able to transfer imputation credits to a profit company in conjunction with undertaking a loss offset. The imputation credit transfer mechanism allows the profit company to pay a fully imputed dividend despite engaging in loss grouping; thus removing any potential economic problem where a profit company may have insufficient imputation credits to fully impute a dividend if it has engaged in loss grouping and thus paid less tax. See further at ¶17-107. Group company status Two or more companies are part of a group of companies where there is at any time a group of persons the aggregate of whose “common voting interests” is equal to or greater than 66% and when a “market value circumstance” exists in respect of any company, the aggregate of whose “common market value interests” is equal to or greater than 66%. The terms “common voting interests” and “common market value interests”, measured at a particular time, refer to the lowest percentage interests held in each company by a shareholder at the time. A group of companies can include an offshore company, even where that company derives no income from New Zealand and conducts no business activity in this country. See C of IR v Alcan New Zealand Ltd (1994) 16 NZTC 11,175 (CA). Before Alcan New Zealand, Inland Revenue took the view that an offshore subsidiary might not be included within a group of companies. Note, however, the express provisions of s IC 7 that prohibit loss grouping by non-resident companies (¶18-060). Generally, a group of companies cannot include a multi-rate PIE or a listed PIE. There is an exception for a multi-rate PIE that owns 100% of the voting interests in the other group members. Those other group members must be multi-rate PIEs, land investment companies, foreign PIE equivalents or subsidiary companies that satisfy the entry and exit rules for PIEs in s HM 7(a) and (d). A multi-  rate PIE that becomes a foreign investment PIE must not be part of a company group that includes a land investment company. If one out of two or more companies is a listed PIE, the companies are a group if the PIE owns 100% of the voting interests in the other companies. A group of companies may contain only one mixed-ownership enterprise (see sch 36, pt B) at any particular time. Company group for an income year Companies will be treated as part of a group of companies where at all times during the relevant period a group of persons (whether during that relevant period they are the same group of persons) have an aggregate of common voting interests (and common market value interests if a market value circumstance exists) of at least 66%. To group losses, the 66% commonality needs to be maintained at all times from the commencement of the income year in which the loss company incurs the loss to the end of the income year in which the loss is grouped. Example 2: Loss Co and Profit Co are both wholly owned by Bob at the beginning of the year. After six months, Bob sells 10% of Loss Co to Patti and 30% of Profit Co to Kim. Are Loss Co and Profit Co in the same group of companies for the whole of the year (assume there is no market value circumstance)? Yes. Although there is a change in the ownership of the companies in the second six months, there is at least 66% commonality of ownership at all times during the year: First six months Loss Co  Profit Co  Lowest common voting interest  Bob  100%  100%  100%  Patti  0%  0%  0%  Kim  0%  0%  0%  Aggregate of lowest common voting interests = 100%. Second six months Loss Co  Profit Co  Lowest common  voting interest Bob  90%  70%  70%  Patti  10%  0%  0%  Kim  0%  30%  0%  Aggregate of lowest common voting interests = 70%. Example reproduced with permission from Tax Education Office Newsletter No 127, 20 December 1996 at 4.  Under s IC 3(3)–(5) changes in shareholding for group companies are not material, provided the 66% common shareholding interest test is satisfied for the group from the tax year the loss arose until the loss is offset: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 99. Law: IT07 subpart IC, s IA 6(1)  ¶18-055 Wholly-owned group of companies A wholly-owned group is a group of companies where, for the relevant period, a group of persons hold common voting interests that add up to 100% and, if a market value circumstance exists in any company, common market value interests that add up to 100%. Any shares held by employee share purchase schemes representing no more than 3% of the voting or market value interests in the company are disregarded. The concept of a wholly-owned group is also relevant for other areas including: ▪ the consolidation regime ▪ special provisions under the controlled foreign company and foreign investment fund regimes for wholly-owned groups ▪ the intercorporate dividend exemption under s CW 10 ▪ provisions on depreciation, and  ▪ bloodstock valuation. Example: Question: John and Peggy own between them 100% of the shares in three companies as set out below (assume no market value circumstance exists). Do these companies form a wholly-owned group? Shareholder  Company X  Company Y  Company Z  John  49%  51%  50%  Peggy  51%  49%  50%  Answer: No, the companies do not form a wholly-owned group, because the lowest common voting interests of John and Peggy in each company, when aggregated, are less than 100%. Shareholder  Company X  Company Y  Company Z  Lowest common voting interest  John  49%  51%  50%  49%  Peggy  51%  49%  50%  49%  Total  100%  100%  100%  98%  Law: IT07 s IC 4  ¶18-060 Grouping tax losses Subject to certain conditions being satisfied, companies in the same group of companies can group losses either by election or by subvention payment. In particular, the loss company can: ▪ elect, by notice in accordance with s IC 9(2), that the whole or part of its tax loss in a tax year be made available to a profit company — such an election is irrevocable, or ▪ agree to receive a subvention payment from the profit company in return for the profit company bearing the loss company’s tax loss.  Notice must be given to the Commissioner by the extended return date. This means no later than the 31 March that first follows the end of the loss company’s year of offset, or within such further time as the Commissioner may allow. For example, a loss company on a tax agent’s list with a 30 June 2019 balance date must file an election by 31 March 2020 to validly group losses in the 2018–19 income year. The notification may be made in the company’s annual return of income. Note that where a profit company uses a loss that a loss company has elected to have carried back to a preceding tax year under the temporary loss carry-back scheme in s IZ 8 (see ¶18-016), the extended return date is still determined based on the later tax year in which the loss company’s loss arose. Conditions to be met Grouping of losses requires the following conditions to be satisfied in respect of any tax year: ▪ the profit company is in the same “group of companies” as the loss company from the first day of the year in which the loss was incurred until the last day of the year in which the loss is grouped (and where the profit company’s balance date is later than the loss company’s, until the last day of the year of grouping of the profit company) ▪ the loss company is either incorporated in New Zealand or carrying on business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment, from the first day of the year in which the net loss was incurred until the last day of the year in which the loss is grouped. The loss company must not be treated under a double tax agreement as not being resident in New Zealand or otherwise be liable to overseas income tax ▪ continuity of ownership of at least 49% is maintained in the loss company from the start of the year the loss is incurred until the end of the year of offset (and where the profit company’s balance date is later than that of the loss company, until the last day of the year of offset of the profit company)  ▪ the amount of the loss being made available does not exceed the net income of the profit company, and ▪ in the case of a subvention payment, the following criteria are satisfied: □ the payment does not exceed the amount of the loss company’s tax loss □ the payment is made not later than the 31 March that follows the end of the loss company’s tax year in which the tax loss is subtracted or within such further time as the Commissioner may allow □ the payment is not otherwise taken into account in calculating the taxable income of either the loss company or the profit company, and □ the loss company gives notice of the payment to the Commissioner. If these requirements are met, the grouped losses are subtracted from the profit company’s net income and reduce the loss company’s tax losses. The amount of a subvention payment is deemed not to amount to a dividend arising to the loss company. Example 1: For an income year, Profit Co has net income of $2,000. Loss Co, a subsidiary of Profit Co, has a net loss of $1,000. Profit Co agrees with Loss Co to make a subvention payment of 50% of the tax benefit with the balance of the loss being offset in the financial statements. The steps are: Tax benefit of loss $1,000 × 28% = $280 Subvention payment $280 × 50% = $140 Election to make loss available Total net loss  $1,000  Less: subvention payment  $140 $860  For grouping purposes, the subvention payment of $140 made by Profit Co is subtracted from Profit Co’s net income.  Meaning of “payment” for subvention payment purposes The Commissioner accepts that in the absence of any statutory definition of “payment” in the context of subvention payments, it should be given its ordinary meaning. Therefore, the requirement for payment to have taken place will be satisfied when the obligation under the subvention payment agreement has been discharged. The obligation can be discharged by an actual cash payment, cheque or bank transfer. Other methods of discharging an obligation can also amount to “payment”. An obligation will generally be discharged where the payee can no longer sue the payer for the payment. It should be noted that an accounting entry that merely records an intention to pay a subvention payment will not in itself amount to a “payment”. Also, simply resolving to pay a subvention payment does not amount to creating an enforceable obligation. Impact of COVID-19 virus on subvention payments Inland Revenue acknowledged that the COVID-19 pandemic might have affected the ability of companies to make a valid subvention payment for the 2019 tax year. Inland Revenue stated that for subvention payments for the 2019 tax year that would otherwise have been due on 31 March 2020, the subvention payments would be allowed if the companies: ▪ agreed that they intended to make a subvention payment, and ▪ filed their income tax returns as soon as practicable, but by 31 May 2020 at the latest, and ▪ provided Inland Revenue with notice of the subvention payment by 31 May 2020.  Example 2 Zeus Technologies Group is a group of software companies operating in New Zealand with common ownership and a balance date of 31 March. Zeus Technologies Group intends to make a subvention payment between two of its group companies – Z Sales Co Ltd (the profit company) and Z Development Co Ltd (the loss company). The necessary conditions relating to subvention payments have been met. Z Development Co Ltd has agreed to receive a subvention payment from Z Sales Co Ltd in return for Z Sales Co Ltd bearing its tax loss. Zeus Technologies Group was due to file its 2019 income tax return by 31 March 2020 as it had an extension of time. However, due to COVID-19, the group was unable to provide its tax agent with its latest tax information and the group was therefore unable to file by 31 March 2020. The Commissioner has indicated that provided Zeus Technologies Group files its return as soon as practicable and before 31 May 2020, any late filing penalties will be waived and the time bar will not be extended (assuming the required conditions are satisfied). Similarly, as a result of COVID-19, Zeus Technologies Group was also unable to provide the Commissioner with notice of the subvention payment before the due date of 31 March 2020 and Z Sales Co Ltd did not make the subvention payment to Z Development Co Ltd. Zeus Technologies Group files its group tax return on 4 May 2020, including notice of the subvention payment between Z Sales Co Ltd and Z Development Co Ltd. Z Sales Co Ltd also makes the subvention payment to Z Development Co Ltd on 4 May 2020. As the subvention payment and election (and group tax return) were late as a result of COVID-19 but were made as soon as practicable and before 31 May 2020, the Commissioner will allow the subvention payment. Example from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 23 April 2020  Standard practice statement In February 2020, Inland Revenue released standard practice statement SPS 20/02, “Loss offset elections between group companies” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 3, April 2020 at 18) (replacing the previous statement SPS 17/03). The statement applies from 12 February 2020 for an indefinite period and sets out: ▪ certain practices that the Commissioner will accept for offsetting losses by election between group companies (for example, the requirements for giving notice of the loss offset and the Commissioner’s practice regarding part-year losses), and ▪ the consequences of specific events that can affect a loss offset (for example, the reassessment of the loss company’s loss or the profit company’s profit) and how these should be addressed.  The statement relates to subpart IC of the Income Tax Act 2007, but it is not a comprehensive guide. SPS 20/02 reaches the same conclusions as SPS 17/03, which applied from 14 December 2017, but one of the examples has been expanded to clarify that late loss offset elections can be made where, at the original time of filing the loss company’s return, the loss company was unaware of the group companies’ profit outcome. The replacement statement also recognises that not all additional late loss offsets will result in an amendment to assessments. Grouping of loss limited for bad debt and share loss deductions A deduction cannot be claimed by a company (the write-off company) for either bad debts or share losses and then a further deduction claimed by the group offsetting losses of the relevant loss company. Section IC 12 prohibits a company in the group from grouping losses when: ▪ the write-off company has been allowed a deduction for a bad debt from an intra-group loan or a loss on shares (whether a loss on disposal or by a decrease in value of trading stock under subpart EB), and ▪ the loss company claimed a deduction for expenditure funded by the loan or by the issue of the shares that was taken into account in calculating the tax loss of the loss company. The tax loss of the loss company will only be available to be grouped to the extent that it exceeds the aggregate of the deductions allowed to the write-off company for the relevant debts or share losses. A loss company in the same group as the write-off company can carry forward a loss for offsetting against its own income in future income years: see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 100. Example 3: Bad debt deduction and loss limitation  In November 20X1, Lender Co lends $2m to Borrower Co, a company in which Lender Co owns 67% of the shares. Borrower Co uses the money in a high-risk business venture. The venture fails. Borrower Co makes a business loss of $3m from the investment for the 20X1–X2 income year. In March 20X2, Lender Co decides to write off the $2m debt owing as bad. Lender Co satisfies the criteria for a bad debt deduction in s DB 31. Section IC 12 prohibits Lender Co (or any other company in the same group) from utilising the net loss of Borrower Co to the extent that the net loss equals or is less than the bad debt deduction obtained. Therefore, Lender Co will be entitled to utilise $1m of the net loss of Borrower Co (ie loss of $3m less the bad debt deduction $2m).  Example 4: Share write-down and loss limitation C Ltd, a share trader, subscribed for the entire share capital ($400,000) in K Ltd on 1 April 20X1. Both companies have 31 March balance dates. During the income year, K Ltd used all the funds in tax-deductible expenditure and made a net loss of $370,000. Accordingly, C Ltd devalues its shares in K Ltd to $0 and claims a deduction for this under s DB 49 in its 20X1–X2 income tax return which shows a net profit for the year of $50,000. C Ltd seeks to offset K Ltd’s $370,000 net loss. C Ltd cannot utilise K Ltd’s net loss because, although both companies are group companies, the loss of $370,000 does not exceed the deduction claimed for the share loss of $400,000. Thus the requirements of s IC 12 are not satisfied. The $370,000 loss balance must be carried forward in K Ltd and is not available for grouping with C Ltd or any other company in the same group during the 20X1–X2 income year.  Reduction of losses used by group companies The Commissioner may determine that the actual tax loss incurred by a loss company in a group is less than the aggregate of that company’s losses used by two or more group companies. In this situation, any losses utilised by profit companies in a group will require adjustment. When the Commissioner gives a loss company notice of a determination of a reduced loss, the loss company has six months from the date of the notice (or within such further time as the Commissioner allows) to notify the Commissioner how that loss reduction should be allocated among the profit companies originally involved in the loss grouping (ie as a reduction in the respective losses subtracted by the profit companies).  If a profit company is no longer a member of the same group of companies as the loss company at the time at which the loss reduction allocation is made, the loss reduction allocated to that profit company cannot exceed the amount that would be allocated if it were apportioned among the original profit companies. If the allocation does exceed such a pro rata calculation, the allocation is disregarded. If an allocation of the loss reduction is outside the time limit, is not made, or is deemed not to have been made, the loss reduction is allocated on a pro rata basis among the profit companies. An allocation of loss reduction may result in any subvention payment for the loss utilisation being treated as a dividend received by the loss company. In that case, the dividend is deemed to be reduced to the extent that payment is refunded to the profit company within six months of the notice of the loss reduction determination issued by the Commissioner. Law: IT07 ss IC 1, IC 2, IC 5–IC 12  ¶18-065 Grouping of part-year losses In common with the general rules for carrying forward loss balances referred to at ¶18-025, part-year rules also apply for the grouping of tax losses. These part-year rules allow tax losses to be grouped even in circumstances where there has been a breach of commonality or continuity of ownership part-way through the year. Section IP 4 applies when a tax loss arises in the tax year in which the requirements for grouping tax losses are breached. It modifies the criteria for grouping a company’s tax loss set out in s IC 5 for part-year losses. Where continuity or commonality is breached, the net loss of a company arising during an income year can be identified between pre- and post-breach net losses. The pre-breach net losses will be available for grouping by the pre-breach owners with the post-breach net losses available for grouping by the new owners, provided adequate accounts have been prepared and provided to the Commissioner by both the profit company and the  loss company. The net loss available to be grouped for each period cannot exceed the net income of the profit company for that period. The part-year accounts must be prepared by applying the provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007 to the period in question as if it were a tax year. In other words, end-of-year adjustments that are normally made by the companies (eg bad debt deductions, trading stock provisions, depreciation recovery income or depreciation loss on disposal, and attributed CFC income and loss) must also be made at the end of the period. Section IP 5 applies when a loss company has carried forward a loss balance to a tax year in which either the continuity or commonality requirements for grouping tax losses are breached. The losses that have been carried forward to a subsequent year can be grouped but only to the extent of the net income of the other group companies prior to the breach. Adequate financial statements must be provided to the Commissioner and, as above, the part-year accounts must be prepared as if the part-year period in question was a tax year. Law: IT07 ss IC 5(6), IP 1, IP 2, IP 4–IP 7  ¶18-085 Losses used to discharge shortfall penalties A tax loss may be used to satisfy any shortfall penalties that a taxpayer is required to pay, so long as an appropriate election is made in terms of s IW 1. A wholly-owned group of companies may also elect to apply a loss incurred by one member of the group against any shortfall penalty imposed against any other group member. Each dollar of tax loss used to pay a shortfall penalty is equal to one dollar multiplied by the company tax rate (or, in the case of an individual, the marginal tax rate) for the period to which the shortfall penalty relates. Law: IT07 ss IA 3(1), IW 1  QUALIFYING COMPANIES & LOOK-THROUGH COMPANIES Qualifying Companies  ¶19-010  Look-through Companies  ¶19-155  QUALIFYING COMPANIES ¶19-010 Qualifying companies — background The qualifying company (QC) regime changed from 1 April 2011 for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2011. Existing QCs and loss-attributing qualifying companies (LAQCs) can continue to use the QC rules (but without the ability to attribute losses) while the review of the tax rules for dividends is carried out. Transitional rules allowed existing QCs and LAQCs to transition to a look-through company (LTC) or change to another business entity without tax cost between 1 April 2011 and 31 March 2013. Companies that were not already QCs as at 1 April 2011 are no longer able to enter the QC regime. Note that with effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, QC status will cease for remaining QCs if there is a change in control of the company. See ¶19-038. The QC regime (an elective regime) is contained in subpart HA. Overall, the QC rules aim to treat small, closely-held companies in a similar way to partnerships. This is achieved by deeming the shareholders and the QC to be one entity for tax purposes. However, all the benefits of corporate ownership, in particular limited liability, remain.  Before 1 April 2011, there were two classes of QC. One class was composed of LAQCs, in which company net losses were attributed to shareholders on the basis of their effective interest in the LAQC. An LAQC had to meet the requirements of an ordinary QC in addition to other requirements. The second class consisted of the “other” QCs (the non-LAQCs), that had to carry their loss balances forward. From 1 April 2011, there is only one class of QC for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2011. A QC pays only two types of dividend — taxable but fully imputed dividends, or exempt dividends to resident shareholders. A QC pays taxable dividends to the extent of the amount of imputation credits it has available to attach. After that, the dividends that the company pays are exempt from income tax. This offers shareholders tax-free access to capital gains derived by closely-held companies without liquidation of the company. This is regarded as a major advantage of QC status. The changes grandparent the QC rules for existing QCs and LAQCs only. That is the QC rules still apply going forward to QCs existing at 1 April 2011 unless they are liquidated, choose to revoke their QC election, or use the transition rules to transition to another entity. The changes from 1 April 2017 ensure QC status will also be lost if there is a change in control of the company. Companies that were not already QCs are prevented from entering the QC rules for income years starting on or after 1 April 2011. QC or LAQC choosing to transition to an LTC Transitional rules existed for existing QCs or LAQCs to choose to become an LTC before 30 September 2012. Law: IT07 subpart HA  ¶19-015 Advantages and disadvantages of being a qualifying company Advantages  Some of the advantages of the qualifying company (QC) regime were: ▪ dividends paid by a QC are either tax free to resident shareholders or have maximum imputation credits attached ▪ non-cash dividends distributed to shareholders of QCs who are not employees or associated to an employee are not subject to fringe benefit tax, and ▪ during the time that a company is a QC, no debit arises in the company’s imputation credit account for a breach of shareholder continuity (see ¶19-120). Disadvantages Some of the disadvantages of the QC regime were: ▪ its complexity ▪ shareholders are personally liable for a share of any of the company’s income tax liabilities ▪ inability to group with non-QCs to offset available tax losses against net income ▪ the continuing compliance costs, and ▪ the possible limitation of interest deductibility (see ¶10-650).  ¶19-025 Definition of a qualifying company It is no longer possible for a company to become a qualifying company (QC). For an existing QC to remain a QC, all of the following criteria have to be met: the entity cannot be a unit trust, it cannot be a foreign company (see ¶19-030), and it must have five or fewer shareholders or be a flat-owning company (see ¶19-035). Each shareholder in the company must be either another QC, a natural person, or a trustee  of a trust in which all dividend income (excluding non-cash dividends that are not taxable bonus issues) derived by the trustee from the QC is beneficiary income of beneficiaries other than trustees or nonQCs. The company cannot derive more than $10,000 in foreignsourced non-dividend income in any year, or have an income interest in a CFC or a direct income interest of 10% or more in an FIF (see ¶19-040). All shareholders must elect to be severally liable for a proportion of the QC’s income tax (see ¶19-055). Valid shareholder and director elections must remain in force and not be revoked. Law: IT07 ss HA 2, HA 5–HA 9  ¶19-030 Qualifying companies and the non-resident test A qualifying company cannot be a company that is not resident in New Zealand or is resident but is treated as non-resident for the purposes of a double tax agreement. Law: IT07 s HA 6(2)  ¶19-035 Qualifying companies and the shareholder test Each shareholder in a qualifying company (QC) must be another QC, a natural person, or a trustee of a trust where all dividend income (excluding non-cash dividends other than taxable bonus issues) derived by the trustee from the QC is beneficiary income of beneficiaries who are not trustees or non-QCs. A QC must have five or fewer shareholders or be a flat-owning company. A “flat-owning company” is a company whose shareholders are entitled to the use of a specific residential property (where such properties are the only significant assets of the company). For the purposes of applying the “five or fewer” shareholders test, the following rules apply: ▪ Shares in any QC held by another company are deemed to be held by the ultimate shareholders.  ▪ Shareholders related by blood or marriage, civil union or de facto relationship, or adoption, within one degree of relationship are deemed to be one shareholder. See ¶16-245. Single shareholder status will continue to apply in the event of any subsequent death or dissolution. ▪ Where a trustee is a shareholder the number of deemed shareholders at any time is the greater of: □ the number of beneficiaries who have received dividends from the QC through the trust since the 1991–92 income year, or □ the number of beneficiaries who elected that the company become a QC on behalf of the trust. The trustee is not counted as a shareholder for these purposes. An anti-avoidance provision in s GB 6 prevents a company from being a QC where the shares have been subject to an arrangement for the purposes of allowing a company to be a QC and the arrangement defeats the intention and purpose of the regime. The shareholder test does not affect the determination of each individual shareholder’s effective interest calculation. Law: IT07 ss CD 31(2), GB 6, HA 6(1), HA 7  ¶19-038 Qualifying companies and the shareholder continuity limitation With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, QC status is lost if there is a change in control of the company. This is to ensure that existing QC owners cannot trade any tax advantage. The change in control is measured using a continuity test and requires a “minimum QC interest” (being the lowest voting or market value interest held in the company during the continuity period) of at least 50% for the “QC continuity period”. The “QC continuity period”  extends from 30 March 2017 (the date the relevant legislation was enacted) to the last day in the relevant income year. Note that for the purposes of the shareholder continuity measurement, changes to shareholding resulting from property relationship settlements or the death of a shareholder are ignored. An exclusion also applies under the section for transfers of shares between close relatives. Transfers between close relatives are treated as being held by a single notional person and are ignored when measuring a change in control. A “close relative” is defined for these purposes for a person as a spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner, or other person within the second degree of relationship to the person. Example: A QC has two shareholders. Mickey holds 45% of the shares and Minnie holds 55% of the shares. Minnie transfers her shares to her son, Max. Max then transfers half of his shareholding to his wife, Michelle. As the transfers between Minnie, Max and Michelle have all been between close relatives, they are treated as being held by a single notional person and will not affect the QC continuity test.  Law: IT07 ss HA 6(3), (4), (5), YA 1  ¶19-040 Qualifying companies and foreign income A qualifying company (QC) can derive no more than $10,000 of foreign non-dividend income during an income year. Foreign nondividend income means income that does not have a source in New Zealand, is not a dividend, and is not FIF income calculated under the fair dividend rate method. In calculating the amount of foreign non-dividend income derived during an income year, a deduction is permitted for the lesser of the foreign non-dividend income derived under the financial arrangements rules, or 10% of the company’s gross income for the income year. A QC must also not have one or more of the following:  ▪ income interests in a CFC (see ¶26-060) ▪ interests in a FIF that are a direct income interest of 10% or more (see ¶26-110). Law: IT07 ss HA 8B, HA 9, YA 1  ¶19-050 Qualifying companies and director elections A company could only become a qualifying company (QC) if all the directors of that company elected that the company become a QC. Revocation A director election can be revoked only by a resolution of the board of directors notified in writing to the Commissioner. A revocation will then take effect from the later of the beginning of the income year the board nominates or the income year in which the notice is received by the Commissioner. If a director resigns or dies, there is no deemed revocation of the director election. By electing that a company become a QC, directors, unlike shareholders in a shareholder election (see ¶19-055), do not become personally liable for the income tax of the company. Law: IT07 ss HA 5, HA 30, HA 31  ¶19-055 Qualifying companies and shareholder elections A company can only be a qualifying company (QC) where each shareholder who is sui juris, ie a person who has full legal capacity, has signed a notice of election that the company be a QC. In addition, each shareholder must agree to be personally liable for his or her share of the company’s income tax liability based on his or her effective interests in the company. This includes any tax liability that the company itself may have elected to guarantee as a shareholder of another QC. The liability is in respect of income tax and not GST or fringe benefit tax. The shareholder is liable for the “effective interest” he or she may hold in the company for the relevant year. Effective interest is defined as the person’s voting interest in the  company at that time or for that income year (see ¶16-145), or where a market value circumstance exists, the average of the person’s voting interest and market value interest in the company (see ¶16175). In determining a person’s effective interest, s HA 44 makes some modifications to the measurement of voting and market value interests. If the shareholder is a company, the tests determining voting and market value interests are applied as if the shareholder is not a company. There is no attribution of interests held by the company shareholder to its own shareholders. Where a shareholder’s voting or market value interest varies during the year, that person’s interest for the period will equal the weighted average of the voting or market value interest. Where a shareholder election (or trustee shareholder election) is revoked, the shareholder is treated as having a nil voting interest and a nil market value interest during any period following the date on which the revocation takes effect, unless the person makes a subsequent shareholder election during, and in respect of, the same income year and in respect of the company. Trustee shareholders A trustee shareholder in a company is treated as having made an election only when that trustee and any one or more natural person sui juris beneficiaries have elected that the company should become a QC. The trustee and beneficiary must also agree to take personal liability for the trust’s portion of the company’s income tax payable. In the case of the trustee, this liability is limited to the extent of the net assets of the trust. If there are no sui juris beneficiaries, the election must be made by the trustee and a natural person (who may also be the trustee) assuming liability on behalf of beneficiaries. If the election made as trustee is made for the majority shareholding under s HA 29, the personal liability extends to the effective interests of the minority shareholding.  To maintain QC status, the trustee shareholder must pay or vest dividends received from the QC as beneficiary income. In some instances, a trustee is prevented under trust law from paying or vesting such income to beneficiaries, thus causing the company to lose its QC status. However, s HA 11(5) provides that QC status will not be lost where the trustee shareholder pays or vests as much of the dividend as is allowed under general trust law. In addition, dividends must have been paid or vested as beneficiary income since the company became a QC. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 157. Minority and majority shareholders One or more shareholders who have effective interests in the company of 50% or more (the majority) may elect that the company become a QC. The majority must also agree to take personal liability for the minority’s share of the company’s income tax payable. The minority, being one or more shareholders with effective interests of less than 50%, are then treated as having made the relevant election. Revocation A shareholder’s election can be revoked by voluntary revocation. The shareholder must notify both the Commissioner and the company. Revocation applies from the beginning of the income year in which Inland Revenue (IR) receives the notice, unless a later year is specified. When determining the effective interest in the company of the person making the revocation, the revocation takes effect when both the company and IR have received the notice, unless a later date is specified. A shareholder’s revocation is also automatic, where certain events occur, ie the death of the shareholder, a previously non-sui juris shareholder becomes sui juris, the entire shareholding is sold to a new shareholder, a joint election has been made and revocation is made by one of the electors, and a minority shareholder becomes a majority shareholder or vice versa.  A period of grace is allowed for new elections to be made: see ¶19070. Law: IT07 ss HA 5, HA 8, HA 11(5), HA 28, HA 29, HA 30, HA 32, HA 33, HA 43, HA 44  ¶19-070 Qualifying companies and period of grace for new elections So long as a new election is made within a specified time, the qualifying company (QC) regime provides for certain periods of grace where an election has been revoked resulting in the QC losing its QC status. A company will, therefore, not cease to be a QC if the following occurs: ▪ the company would have been a QC but for the death of the shareholder or any other person and the company meets all the criteria for being a QC within 12 months ▪ a person eligible to make a shareholder election makes, or is deemed to have made, an election within 63 days after the date of a shareholder revocation ▪ an acquiring shareholder makes an election within 63 days of acquisition of the shares ▪ an existing shareholder who acquires legal capacity makes a shareholder election within 63 days of acquiring legal capacity ▪ a minority shareholder makes an election within 63 days of becoming a majority shareholder, or a new majority shareholder makes an election in respect of the minority shareholding within 63 days, or ▪ a jointly made election is revoked due to any of the events listed above, and a new election is made within the relevant period of grace (63 days or 12 months depending on the underlying reason for revocation).  On application, these periods of grace may be extended by the Commissioner. Law: IT07 ss HA 34–HA 37  ¶19-075 Date when non-complying company ceases to be a qualifying company When a qualifying company (QC) ceases to satisfy the criteria of being a QC, that company will generally cease to be a QC from the beginning of the income year in which the event occurred. This will occur regardless of whether it was known, or possible to ascertain at that time, that the company had ceased to comply. However, a company can apply to the Commissioner to defer the cessation of QC status until the first day of a later income year. This application can be made where, at the particular time, the company did not know (and could not reasonably be expected to know) that it would cease to be a QC because of a reasonable expectation or belief that: ▪ a new election would be made within the period of grace ▪ the company’s foreign non-dividend income would not exceed the $10,000 limit, or ▪ QC dividend income derived by a trustee shareholder would be distributed as beneficiary income. In exercising her discretion, the Commissioner must be satisfied that — with regard to the period of time elapsing between the beginning of the income year and the date of failing to comply with the QC status and also between the date of failing to comply and the date on which the failure to comply became known, and with regard to the types of transactions of the company and any other circumstances — it would be unduly harsh, or inappropriate, to treat the company as having ceased, for the purposes of the Income Tax Act 2007, to be a QC from the earlier date. Law: IT07 ss HA 4, HA 11  ¶19-080 Qualifying companies and liability of electing shareholder A shareholder who elects that the company be a qualifying company is personally liable for a percentage of any income tax payable by that company. The Commissioner can assess the shareholder and the shareholder is liable as an agent for the share of the company’s income tax equal to his or her “effective interest” (see ¶19-055) in the company. In addition, no assessment of income tax either for the company or of an electing person precludes an assessment being made of the other. The Commissioner can also reduce the tax payable in relation to part of a year where a shareholder acquires shares, or disposes of his or her shareholding during an income year and the shareholder can show that the amount actually attributable to the part of the income year in which he or she was a shareholder is smaller on a proportionate basis to the tax payable by the company for the whole year. Where the Commissioner reduces the percentage of tax liability, the shareholder’s liability is determined in relation to that reduced percentage. Law: TAA s 92AB  ¶19-085 Qualifying companies and taxation of shareholders Where a shareholder receives a non-cash dividend (other than a taxable bonus issue) that dividend has no imputation credits attached and is exempt income in the hands of the shareholder. Where a shareholder borrows money to buy shares in a qualifying company (QC), the shareholder’s interest deduction has to be reduced by the amount of the non-cash dividends received, with the balance of the interest deductible if it meets the deductibility test in s DB 6 (see ¶10-650). This restriction extends to associates of the shareholder. This prevents a shareholder or a person associated with that shareholder from receiving an exempt non-cash dividend and also obtaining a deduction for the interest. Where a shareholder in a QC is also an employee, in-kind benefits received by the  shareholder-employee are subject to fringe benefit tax. Such benefits are excluded from the term dividend (unless it is an unclassified benefit and the QC elects dividend treatment, see ¶16-585 and ¶16695). Consequently, the shareholder-employee will not receive any non-cash dividends and the shareholder-employee’s interest deduction will not be restricted. For a discussion of the taxation of dividends paid by a QC, see ¶19-115. Law: IT07 ss CW 15, DB 9, HA 14–HA 16  ¶19-090 Taxation of qualifying companies Generally, qualifying companies (QCs) are taxed on dividends received from other companies. Previously, s CW 10 did not apply to exempt a dividend derived by a company that has been a QC at any time before the date of derivation of the dividend, except in the case of dividends derived from a foreign company. A dividend received by a QC was not exempt, regardless of the wholly-owned group status of both companies. This was because of a potential avoidance risk. However, on a review it was concluded the rule went too far and prevented the use of the inter-corporate dividend exemption in circumstances when the avoidance risk was minimal and so the scope of the rule has been limited. In 2017, retrospective amendments were made that apply for the 2005–06 and later income years. The inter-corporate dividend exemption in s CW 10 is now available to companies that have previously been qualifying companies when either: ▪ the dividend is derived at least seven years after the company ceased to be a qualifying company, or ▪ the company never paid an un-imputed dividend while it was a qualifying company. With regard to losses, a QC in profit can only utilise the tax losses of another QC in the same group. However, a QC in loss can offset against a non-QC in profit (ie there is no express restriction against this in s HA 22).  A QC does not have an automatic deduction for interest expenditure — see ¶10-650. Law: IT07 ss CW 14, DB 7(2), HA 17, HA 22  ¶19-110 Qualifying companies and loss balances carried forward A qualifying company (QC) can carry forward its loss balances in the same way as a non-QC. However, on becoming a QC, any loss balances that arose in income years relating to when the company was a non-QC were forfeited. Similarly, the loss balance of a non-QC that ceases to exist on amalgamation with a QC cannot be carried forward to the amalgamated QC. Law: IT07 ss HA 21, HA 23  ¶19-115 Dividends paid by a qualifying company Dividends paid to New Zealand resident shareholders by a qualifying company (QC) are not subject to further tax in the hands of the shareholder, unless the shareholder has a marginal tax rate that exceeds the company tax rate. Dividends paid to non-resident shareholders of a QC are generally liable to non-resident withholding tax, although specific concessions may apply. See ¶26-440. When a QC pays a dividend to a New Zealand resident shareholder, the following applies: ▪ The dividend is exempt income of the shareholder, to the extent that it exceeds total imputation credits attached (see ¶19-120) divided by the basic rate of income tax for companies in the year in which it is derived. Example: Bruce Ltd, a QC, declares a dividend of $85,000, to which $28,000 of imputation credits are attached. The gross dividend including imputation credits is  $113,000. The non-exempt portion of the dividend is $100,000 ($28,000 ÷ 0.28). The exempt portion of the dividend is $13,000. The shareholder will be required to include as income in his or her personal tax return the dividend of $100,000, with $28,000 imputation credits attached. If the shareholder has a marginal tax rate of 33%, the imputation credits will be insufficient to cover his or her tax payable on this dividend.  ▪ Any unexpired 10-year bonus issue returned to shareholders before expiry of the 10-year period is not exempt income; rather, it is income to the shareholder. ▪ Any amount of imputation credit is deemed to be attached to the part of the dividend that is not exempt from tax. ▪ Any dividend that is exempt income to a trustee shareholder under these provisions retains its exempt status upon distribution to New Zealand resident beneficiaries of the relevant trust. ▪ Sections CW 9 and CW 10 do not exempt a dividend paid by a QC to a resident shareholder. When a dividend is exempt income under the QC regime, the inter-corporate dividend exemption does not apply. ▪ The whole of the dividend does not constitute resident passive income. ▪ Where a shareholder has a late balance date and a dividend is derived between 31 March and the shareholder’s balance date, that dividend is treated as if it had been derived by the shareholder on the day following the shareholder’s balance date. Law: IT07 ss CW 15, HA 14–HA 16  ¶19-120 Qualifying companies and imputation credits attached to dividend  When a qualifying company (QC) pays a dividend, the amount of any credits that may be attached during an imputation year is calculated at the end of each imputation year and is the lesser of the maximum imputation credits able to be attached under the imputation regime or an amount calculated in accordance with the formula set out at s HA 15(6). Consequently, the whole dividend paid will be fully imputed. If there are insufficient credits to fully impute the whole dividend, all the imputation credits in the company’s imputation credit account (ICA) will be used. QCs and further income tax In the case of QCs, a refund or allocation within a wholly-owned group of overpaid income tax can be made regardless of the credit balance in their ICA (unless the tax was overpaid as part of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage). Further income tax will not be charged in respect of uncleared debit balances caused by refunds, and such debit balances may be carried over into future imputation years for offset against any credits arising. Shareholder and company dividend statements A company dividend statement must be completed and the shareholder dividend statement must be issued to the shareholder by 31 May following the end of the tax year in which the dividends were paid: s HA 19(4) (although note that the relevant provisions in the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) require the information to be provided either at the time the dividend is paid or by the 20th of the following month). The information to be included in the company dividend statement is set out in s 25G and sch 6 of the TAA. The information for the shareholder dividend statement is set out in s 29 of the TAA. In addition, a QC must inform its shareholders, in the shareholder dividend statement, of the portion of those dividends that are exempt from tax and the portion that is taxable. Also, if the shareholder requests, the shareholder dividend statement must include the amount of non-cash dividends paid to the shareholder during the imputation year.  Shareholder continuity debit While the company is a QC, the imputation shareholder continuity requirement of 66% for maintaining an ICA balance will not apply. See ¶17-055. During this time, debits arise only from attachments to dividends and refunds of income tax. Where a company ceases to be a QC, there is a debit to the ICA that is equal to the lesser of the balance at that time (after attaching the maximum possible imputation credits to the dividends paid during the imputation year), and the greatest previous balance in the ICA at that date of any prior breach of the 66% continuity rule. See ss HA 18(3) and OB 41(3B). Example: Moggy Ltd is a QC. A 40% change in shareholding occurred in Moggy Ltd on 31 March 2013. The ICA balance on 31 March 2013 is $60,000. On 31 March 2014 Moggy Ltd’s ICA balance is $81,000. The company pays a fully imputed gross dividend of $200,000 for the year ended 31 March 2014. After payment of the dividend, Moggy Ltd’s ICA balance at 31 March 2014 is $25,000 ($81,000 − ($200,000 × 0.28)). On 30 June 2014 (ie during the 2014–15 income year) new individuals purchase shares in Moggy Ltd. No new shareholder elections are filed within 63 days of the change in shareholding. Therefore, the company ceases to be a QC on 1 April 2014. The debit arising to Moggy Ltd’s ICA on 30 June 2014 will be $25,000. This is the lesser of the excess in the ICA at 31 March 2014 ($25,000) and the debit that would have arisen as a result in the change of shareholding continuity on 31 March 2013 ($60,000).  Law: IT07 ss HA 15, HA 17–HA 19, OA 18, OB 41(3B), OB 67, RM 32; TAA ss 25G, 29, sch 6  ¶19-150 Qualifying companies and the transition to a new entity The revised qualifying company (QC) rules continue to apply to QCs and loss-attributing qualifying companies (LAQCs) without the ability to attribute losses (see ¶19-010) existing at 1 April 2011 unless they chose to revoke their QC election or used one of the transition  options available in either one of the first two income years beginning on or after 1 April 2011. If the company chose not to transition, they remain in the QC rules. If a QC or LAQC decided to transition, then the transition had to take place within the time frame allowed and satisfy certain requirements to avoid a tax cost. Existing QCs and LAQCs could choose to transition to a look-through company (LTC), partnership, limited partnership or sole trader at no tax cost. The transitional rules have now expired. For further discussion of the transition options, see CCH, New Zealand Master Tax Guide 2013, ¶19-150. Note that with effect from 1 April 2017, remaining QCs lose their status as a QC if there is a change in control of the company. An exclusion exists for transfers between close relatives. See ¶19-038. Law: IT07 subpart HB, ss CB 32C, DV 21, DV 23, DV 24, HA 33B, HZ 4B–HZ 4D  LOOK-THROUGH COMPANIES ¶19-155 Look-through companies (LTCs): Background Closely held companies are companies with few shareholders. Although many of these companies use the general tax rules to govern their interface with shareholders, there are specific tax rules available for certain types of closely held companies. Since the early 1990s, very closely held companies had been able to pass capital gains and company losses through to shareholders by electing to become a qualifying company (QC) or a loss-attributing qualifying company (LAQC). In 2010, the Government announced major changes to those specific tax rules, essentially removing LAQCs, closing off the QC rules for new entities and providing a replacement option that enabled a closely held company to be treated as if it were a partnership. Under this new approach, a company’s income and expenditure would be directly attributed to its owners in proportion to their interests via the new look-through company (LTC) rules.  The LTC regime provides for the taxation consequences of the company’s activities to be attributed to the company’s shareholders. Income and expenditure of the LTC is ascribed to the company’s shareholders for income tax purposes, with the shareholders consequentially assessable on the income or possibly able to offset any loss against income from another source. Offset of the loss is subject to a loss limitation rule restricting the offset to the shareholder’s net investment in the LTC. The LTC rules (which are contained mainly in subpart HB of the Income Tax Act 2007) apply for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2011. Law: IT07 subpart HB  ¶19-160 Transparency and other key features of an LTC The key features of a look-through company (LTC) are as follows: ▪ An LTC retains all the obligations and benefits, like limited liability, of a corporate entity under company law. However, for tax purposes, income, expenses, gains, losses and tax credits are passed on to shareholders in proportion to their shareholding. ▪ The company must have five or less look-through counted owners (see ¶19-170). The ownership interests of relatives are combined. From 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, all shareholders must simply have the same rights, proportionally, to distributions by the LTC. See ¶19-165. Before 1 April 2017, all shares had to be of the same class and all owners had to have the same rights and obligations. ▪ Only the following persons can hold shares in an LTC (see ¶19170): □ natural persons □ trustees, or  □ another LTC. ▪ All owners must elect for the LTC rules to apply (see ¶19-175). The LTC then retains its status until an election is revoked (see ¶19-180). ▪ Owners are subject to tax on their share of the LTC’s profit at the owner’s marginal rate (see ¶19-200). ▪ LTC losses flow through to the owners who can apply those losses to their other income (subject to the loss limitation rule — see ¶19-215). ▪ Owners who sell their shares in the LTC are treated as disposing of their share of the LTC’s property (see ¶19-225). ▪ Owners are subject to income tax on deemed disposal of the LTC’s property, unless an exclusion applies (see ¶19-225). Transparency only applies for income tax purposes. The limited liability afforded by the company structure is not affected under corporate law when a company elects to be an LTC. In addition, the LTC is treated as separate from its owners for various withholding regimes and other tax purposes such GST, PAYE, FBT, ESCT, RSCT, RWT and NRWT. Transparency is achieved by imputing the income and expenditure of the LTC to the holders of the look-through interests in the company in proportion to those interests. Owners are treated as holding the LTC’s property in proportion to their effective look-through interests. Owners are treated as carrying on the LTC’s activities and having the LTC’s status, intention and purpose. All owners are treated as being party to any arrangement to which the LTC is a party. Owners are treated as doing a thing and being entitled to a thing that the LTC does or is entitled to do. Elections under any Inland Revenue Act concerning the tax treatment of an LTC’s income or property, or any valuation or timing methods adopted in relation to an LTC’s income or property are  initially made or established by the LTC but are then treated as being the election or method of the owners for their effective look-through interests. Law: IT07 ss HB 1, YA 1  ¶19-165 The definition of an LTC For an entity to be a look-through company (an LTC): ▪ it must be a company (see ¶16-010) ▪ it must be a New Zealand tax resident (see ¶1-140) ▪ it must not be treated as a non-resident under a double tax agreement (see ¶26-280) ▪ it must have five or fewer look-through counted owners (see ¶19170) ▪ from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, all shareholders must have the same rights, proportionally, to distributions by the LTC (note that previously an LTC was restricted to having only one class of shares) ▪ from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, no owner that is a trustee of a trust makes distributions to corporate beneficiaries, unless the company is a grandparented Māori authority or a tax charity that has no control or influence over the operations of the LTC or the distributions of the trust (see below) ▪ from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, no owner is a tax charity, unless the tax charity is a grandparented charity (see below) ▪ from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, no owner that is a trustee of a trust makes distributions to a tax charity beneficiary of the trust, unless the tax charity has no influence over the LTC or trust distributions (see below)  ▪ from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, no owner is a Māori authority, unless the Māori authority is a grandparented Māori authority (see below) ▪ from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, no owner that is a trustee of a trust makes distributions to a Māori authority beneficiary of the trust, unless the Māori authority is a grandparented Māori authority (see below) ▪ for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2017, where more than 50% of the total ownership interests in the entity are held by foreign LTC holders, its foreign-sourced income amount for the income year must not be more than the greater of $10,000 and 20% of the entity’s gross income (see below) ▪ it must not be a flat-owning company (see ¶24-060), and ▪ it must have made an election to be an LTC (see ¶19-175). Trustee owners with corporate beneficiaries Before 1 April 2017, although direct ownership of shares in an LTC by companies, other than LTCs, was prohibited, a trust that owned an LTC interest could have a corporate beneficiary. This may have unintentionally provided widely-held non-LTC corporates with a way to circumvent the prohibition on direct ownership. With effect from 1 April 2017, the definition of “look-through company” expressly prohibits trusts that own LTCs from making distributions to corporate beneficiaries either directly or indirectly (unless the company is a grandparented Māori authority or a tax charity with no control or influence over the LTC or the distributions of the trust). Example 1:  Trust B is a shareholder of Company X. Trust C is a beneficiary of Trust B. Company Y is a beneficiary of Trust C. Company X makes a distribution to Trust B. Trust B then passes on the distribution to Trust C who passes it to Company Y. Company X will be ineligible to be an LTC. This is because a trustee shareholder of Company X has made a distribution of income to a company that is indirectly a beneficiary of the trust. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 35.  Tax charities and Māori authorities With effect from 1 April 2017, an amendment to the definition of “look-through company” extended the trust approach of looking through to the ultimate beneficiaries to LTCs owned by tax charities and Māori authorities. This effectively precludes direct ownership by tax charities and direct or indirect ownership by Māori authorities. However, there are some exceptions. The revised definition expressly allows for distributions by trustees to tax charities that have no influence over the LTC or trust from which they receive the distribution, thus providing for true charitable gifts or donations.  To prevent Māori authorities and tax charities incurring the compliance cost of converting their LTC interests to limited partnerships, Māori authorities and charities that had interests in LTCs before 3 May 2016 (the date