-beneficiary income from a trust With effect from 26 June 2019, non-beneficiary income from a trust is included within family scheme income when the person is not a settlor. However, the Commissioner may determine the circumstances in which such a payment should be excluded from family scheme income and if the payment is received in such circumstances, it will not be included. Fringe benefits of controlling shareholders The taxable value of attributable fringe benefits where an employee shareholder and any associated person holds 50% or more of the voting interests is included in the definition of family scheme income. To reduce compliance costs, only fringe benefits that are required to be attributed to an employee under s RD 47 are taken into account. Therefore, the following fringe benefits provided to a shareholderemployee may be subject to inclusion in family scheme income: ▪ motor vehicles ▪ employment-related loans (with the exception of loans provided by life insurers) ▪ the following benefits where the taxable value exceeds $1,000 in an income year: □ subsidised transport  □ contributions to a superannuation scheme □ contributions to sickness □ accident or death benefit funds □ contributions to funeral trusts, and □ the payment of a specified insurance premium or contributions to an insurance fund of a friendly society, and ▪ unclassified benefits where the total taxable value for the employee is $2,000 or more in the relevant year. The value of the fringe benefit to be included as part of family scheme income is calculated as the total of: ▪ the taxable value of the fringe benefit attributed to the person, and ▪ the company’s fringe benefit tax liability for that fringe benefit. Example 2: Chris is an employee of a company controlled by a trust that he settled. Chris is married and has three children under the age of 13. His partner is not in paid employment. Chris receives a salary of $70,000 and is provided with a motor vehicle (with a cost price of $60,000 including GST) which is available at all times for private use. Under the FBT rules, the company must calculate and pay FBT on the private use of the vehicle. The taxable value of the motor vehicle is calculated under s RD 29(4) as: (days × sch 5 amount) ÷ 365 where: days is the number of days in the income year in which the motor vehicle is available to Chris (365 days), and sch 5 amount is, in this case, 20% of the GST-inclusive cost price of the vehicle (20% × $60,000 = $12,000). Therefore, the taxable value of the fringe benefit is $12,000. This amount, together with the FBT payable by the company on the provision of the motor vehicle, is  required to be included as part of Chris’ family scheme income when calculating his eligibility for WFF tax credits.  Fringe benefits of non-controlling shareholders Under s MB 7B certain non-cash benefits received by employees are also included in their family scheme income calculation. Note that s MB 7B applies to all employees to whom s MB 8 does not apply, ie employees who are not controlling shareholders. The availability of an employer-provided motor vehicle for an employee’s private use is included if it is part of an explicit salary trade-off — that is, if the employee would be entitled to a greater amount of employment income if they choose, or have chosen, not to receive the benefit of the motor vehicle. The amount to be included is the amount by which their employment income would be increased in the absence of that benefit. An employee who receives short-term charge facilities (as defined in s CX 25(3) — see ¶21-588) is also required to include these if the value of benefits received in a year is more than the lesser of 5% of the employee’s salary or wages and $1,200. It is important to note that this applies for any employee, not just those employees who work for charitable organisations. Where the threshold is exceeded, the amount included is the aggregate value of all short-term charge facility benefits, including fringe benefit tax. If the employer does not provide the correct rate, then for social policy purposes employees may apply the maximum FBT rate on their short-term charge facilities provided by their employer. Example 3: Mary is employed by a local toy shop as a store assistant. The shop often pays their staff with petrol vouchers. In addition to her pay of $220, Mary is given a $20 petrol voucher each week. This gives Mary an annual wage of $11,440 and vouchers worth $1,040. The threshold that applies to Mary is 5% of her wages, which is $572 ($11,440 × 5%). Because the value of the vouchers is more than $572, Mary will need to include the value ($1,040) plus any FBT her employer has paid on the vouchers, in her income for WFF tax credits.  Deductions allowed When calculating the net income of a taxpayer for WFF tax credit purposes, a deduction is allowed for payments of maintenance, child support and liable parent contributions made to Inland Revenue. Business activities If a person carries on more than one business, the income of each business must be calculated separately. The income and deductions of a net-loss business are ignored for the purposes of calculating family scheme income. When calculating business income, the Commissioner may allow a deduction for expenditure incurred or depreciation loss on any asset used in the business. Deductions relating to an asset used in more than one business must be appropriately apportioned between the businesses. Two or more businesses carried on by a person may be treated as a single business if the Commissioner is satisfied that those businesses are of a kind that are normally carried on in association with each other. Investment losses If a person has or carries on an investment activity in an income year, and that investment produces a net loss, both the income and the deductions from that investment are ignored when calculating family scheme income. An investment activity includes the passive holding of an investment asset, including but not limited to a rental property, but does not include a bank account. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 24. TRA decision Case 2/2012 (2012) 25 NZTC ¶1-014 considered whether rental losses can be taken into account for determining family scheme income under the Income Tax Act 2004. Holding that the losses could not be taken into account, the TRA found that regardless of whether the disputant intended to make a pecuniary property (the disputant’s position being that the rental activity was not a business as only capital profits were intended), the disputant was carrying on a business and the losses must be excluded for the purposes of determining WFF entitlements.  Major shareholders in close companies Any person who is a major shareholder in a close company on the last day of the company’s balance date for financial purposes is required to make a calculation to determine the notional amount included in their family scheme income from the company. A major shareholder in a close company is generally a person who owns or controls or has the right to acquire at least 10% of the shares or voting rights in the company, or has by any other means at least 10% of the control of the company. Shares in a close company held by a dependent child of a principal caregiver are attributed to the principal caregiver or their spouse if they are a major shareholder of the close company. The formula is as follows: (person’s interest + attributed interest) × (income − dividends) where: person’s interest is the percentage voting interest held by the person in the company on the last day of the company’s income year attributed interest is the amount calculated under the formula below income is the net income of the company for the company’s income year dividends is the total dividends paid by the company for the company’s income year. To calculate the attributed interest, the following formula is used: dependent child interest ÷ relevant major shareholders where: dependent child interest is the total percentage voting interests held, on the last day of the company’s income year, by:  — the person’s dependent children — the dependent children of the person’s spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner relevant major shareholders is the total number of the following people who are major shareholders on the last day of the company’s income year: — the person — the person’s spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner — principal caregivers of the dependent children described above (ignoring those caregivers already counted). Contributions to superannuation scheme Employer-funded distributions received by a person from a superannuation scheme may form part of the person’s family scheme income. This will be the case when the employer has contributed to that superannuation scheme in the income year in which the distribution was received or in the preceding two income years, and the person has remained in that employment for at least one month after the distribution. However, a distribution to a person on his or her retirement from employment with an employer who has contributed to the superannuation scheme is not part of the person’s income. The distribution is also not included in income if it is from a superannuation scheme that is a KiwiSaver scheme or a complying superannuation fund. Contributions to retirement savings scheme If a person receives a distribution from a retirement savings scheme of a retirement savings scheme contribution, that distribution is assessable income to the person if retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) was withheld from the contribution and, at the time of the distribution, the person is not eligible for New Zealand  superannuation but is eligible to receive a retirement savings scheme contribution. Other amounts included in the definition of family scheme income Family scheme income also includes: ▪ income from certain pensions and annuities ▪ amounts attributed by a PIE that is not a superannuation fund or a retirement savings scheme ▪ distributions from listed PIEs ▪ passive income of more than $500 derived by a dependent child ▪ non-residents’ foreign-sourced income derived by a person’s spouse, civil union or de facto partner, and ▪ subject to a number of exclusions, payments from any other source used by a person to replace lost or diminished income of the person or the person’s family or to meet usual living expenses of the person or the person’s family that total more than $5,000 for the year. (The exclusions relate primarily to loans, grants, windfall gains and capital amounts.) Amounts attributed by a PIE that is a superannuation fund or a retirement savings scheme and certain refunds made from main income equalisation accounts are excluded from the definition of family scheme income. Canterbury earthquake relief The Commissioner has determined that the Canterbury earthquakes are emergency events for the purposes of determining family scheme income. This means that payments intended to relieve the adverse effects of the earthquakes are not counted as family scheme income for the period specified by the Commissioner. See s MB 13(2)(r) and s 91AAS of the Tax Administration Act.  Arrangements Any arrangements entered into by a person for the purpose of achieving a more favourable effect under the WFF tax credit rules may have their effect negated (ie reduction in family tax credits) by the Commissioner, see s GB 44. Note the section covers arrangements entered into by a person who does not receive the tax credits directly (eg a spouse). Law: IT07 ss GB 44, MB 1–MB 13, MC 11, YA 1, sch 38; TAA s 91AAS  ¶12-130 Calculating the abating WFF tax credit An abating WFF tax credit is one allowed and calculated under s MD 1. An abating WFF tax credit comprises the total of the: ▪ family tax credit — see ¶12-135, and ▪ in-work tax credit (or the child tax credit) — see ¶12-140 reduced by the family credit abatement amount — see ¶12-150. Thus, a person’s abating WFF tax credit for an entitlement period is calculated as: family tax credit + in-work tax credit — credit abatement The amount of abating WFF tax credits payable depends on the level of the applicant’s family scheme income as calculated under subpart MB (see ¶12-125) and the extent of the period for which the taxpayer is entitled to claim the credit. For the purposes of subparts MB–MG and MZ and their related definitions the term “spouse” does not include a “separated person” (ie a person who is separated and living separate and apart from the applicant). Note that the in-work tax credit replaced the child tax credit. A person may still be entitled to the child tax credit but only if that person was receiving the child tax credit before 31 March 2006,  continues to be eligible for the child tax credit, and is not eligible for the in-work tax credit. Law: IT07 ss MD 1, YA 1  ¶12-135 Family tax credit A person’s family tax credit entitlement for an entitlement period is calculated as follows: prescribed amount × days ÷ 365 where: prescribed amount is the maximum annual rate families may be entitled to. See ¶50-041 for the prescribed amounts for the 2017–18 and subsequent income years, and days is the number of days in the entitlement period. The relevant amounts may be increased by Order in Council to take into account the movement in the New Zealand Consumers Price Index (in other words, the amounts may be adjusted for inflation), rounded up to the nearest whole dollar. The first increase must be made if the index number has moved 5% or more from the index that applied on 1 October 2008. Subsequent to that, an Order must be made if the index number moves 5% or more from the date of the last adjustment. The Order must be made no later than 1 December each year and must apply from the following 1 April. Law: IT07 ss MD 3, MF 4, MF 4G, MF 7  ¶12-140 In-work tax credit The in-work tax credit is available to families that work and are not receiving an income-tested benefit. Note that before 1 July 2020, there was an additional requirement that the person or couple worked a minimum number of hours each week. The in-work tax credit is calculated as follows:  (amount A + amount B × (children − 3)) × weekly periods ÷ 52 where: amount A is $3,770 amount B is $780 weekly periods is the number of whole one-week periods in the entitlement period for which the “principal caregiver” (see below) or his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner has “eligible income” (see below) or is an “earner” (before 1 July 2020, a “full-time earner”) (see below). If there are two or more eligible periods forming one continuous period, it is the number of whole one-week periods in that continuous period that is used, and children is the greater of three and the number of children for whom the principal caregiver is entitled to the in-work payment. Amount A and amount B may be increased by Order in Council. The formula effectively results in a tax credit of $3,770 for up to 3 children, and $780 for each additional child where the claimant has more than three children. Entitlement to in-work credit To be eligible for the in-work credit the following criteria must be satisfied: ▪ the principal caregiver is aged 16 years or over ▪ the child being cared for is: □ primarily the responsibility of the principal caregiver other than on a temporary basis, and □ financially dependent on the principal caregiver (including a child for whom payments are made under s 363 of the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989 or a child for whom an orphan’s  benefit or unsupported child’s benefit is paid under s 43 or 46 of the Social Security Act 2018) (see also ¶12-120 under “Joint custody arrangements” for how this criterion is applied to a separated parent) ▪ either the principal caregiver has been both resident and present in New Zealand for a continuous period of 12 months at any time and is a tax resident and resident in New Zealand on the date on which the WFF tax credit is claimed, or the child is both resident and present in New Zealand for the entitlement period ▪ the principal caregiver is neither a transitional resident nor the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner of a transitional resident ▪ neither the principal caregiver nor his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner receives an income-tested benefit (see ¶12-125), a student allowance or an independent circumstances grant for students (see ¶8-160), a parent’s allowance continued by cl 3 of sch 1 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014 or a children’s pension under s 72 or 75 of that Act, and ▪ either or both the principal caregiver and his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner is normally an “earner” (before 1 July 2020, a “full-time earner”) (see below). From 1 April 2021, this requirement will also be met if the person does not meet the requirement at that time but has met the requirement within the last 14 days. Eligible income For the purposes of the in-work tax credit, a person’s eligible income can only comprise: ▪ a “PAYE income payment” subject to certain exclusions (see below), although simply deriving income of the excluded types does not make the person ineligible  ▪ a shareholder-employee salary from a close company with no tax deducted ▪ business income, or ▪ an amount paid or benefit provided by a person receiving a personal services rehabilitation payment from which tax has been withheld, and paid or provided to another person who provided the services. For the purposes of determining the eligible income for an in-work tax credit, excluded from “PAYE income payments” are certain items listed in s MD 9(2)(a)(ii) and (3). Briefly, these excluded items are: ▪ a gratuitous payment made to a person in return for services performed by the person, their parent, child, spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner or former spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner (but not parental leave payments or preterm baby payments) ▪ income-tested benefits, veterans’ pensions, New Zealand superannuation and retirement lump sums paid under Pt 5, subpart 7 of the Veterans’ Support Act ▪ a parent’s allowance continued by cl 3 of sch 1 of the Veterans’ Support Act or a children’s pension under s 72 or s 75 of that Act ▪ a schedular payment that is a contract payment for a contract activity or service of a non-resident contractor ▪ student allowances and independent circumstances grants for students, and ▪ various earnings-related compensation paid under the Accident Compensation Act 1982, the Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance Act 1992, the Accident Insurance Act 1998 and the Injury Prevention, Rehabilitation, and  Compensation Act 2001 (renamed as the Accident Compensation Act 2001 from 3 March 2010). Full-time earner and earner definitions Before 1 July 2020, a full-time earner was defined as either a single person working at least 20 hours per week or a person (either married, in a civil union or in a de facto relationship) who was employed at least 30 hours per week or whose hours of work aggregated to those of his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner totalled 30 hours per week or whose spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner was engaged in full-time employment for at least 30 hours per week. A new earner definition applies from 1 July 2020 for the purposes of the in-work tax credit. An earner is defined as a single person who is employed during a week or a person (either married, or in a civil union or de facto relationship) whose partner or both the person and their partner are employed during the week. The removal of the employment hours test for the in-work tax credit was part of the Coalition Government’s package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus. From 1 July 2020, working families with children who are not receiving a main benefit and have some level of employment income each week no longer have to satisfy the minimum weekly working hours test of 20 hours for a single person or 30 hours for a couple to receive the in-work tax credit. Allowance is made for persons receiving paid parental leave, preterm baby or accident compensation payments who would otherwise be earners. A person who has a payment period under the Compensation for Live Organ Donors Act 2016 and is employed at the start of the period is treated as being employed during the period for the hours for which the person would have been employed but for the organ donation. Similarly, a person who is not working because he or she has become incapacitated through a personal injury by accident or a  service-related injury or illness is treated as being employed for the hours they would have been employed but for the incapacity. Also, a person will be treated as satisfying the full-time earner criteria if: ▪ the person is receiving a child tax credit for an entitlement period ending on 31 March 2006 ▪ the person or his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner suffered an incapacity due to personal injury by accident on or after 1 January 2006 ▪ weekly compensation is being paid (or will be paid) in respect of the incapacity, and ▪ the person or his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner would have satisfied the full-time earner criteria and been eligible for the in-work tax credit at the time of the incapacity if the in-work tax credit had come into force before the date of the incapacity (s MD 9(4)). In addition: ▪ a major shareholder in a close company can meet the earner requirement even if the shareholder does not derive gross income for the income year provided the company derives gross income ▪ a person will still meet the earner requirement if that person is receiving weekly ACC or Veterans’ Affairs New Zealand compensation as a surviving spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner. ▸Note: Amendments have been made to the in-work tax credit as part of the COVID-19 Response Recovery Fund. The amendments provide that a family receiving the in-work tax credit will continue to receive the payments for up to two weeks when an earner is transitioning between jobs, taking an unpaid break from work, or  leaves their employment. However, payments will stop if a benefit is claimed. The amendments take effect from 1 April 2021. Law: IT07 ss MA 7, MC 10, MD 4–MD 10, YA 1  ¶12-145 Paid parental leave Paid parental leave is a government-funded entitlement paid to eligible working mothers and adoptive parents when they take parental leave from their job to care for their newborn or adopted child (under the age of six). Paid parental leave is paid for up to 26 weeks for a child with a due date or born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020. The maximum payment amount is $606.46 before tax each week or 100% of the person’s weekly pay before tax, whichever is the lower. The amount is adjusted on 1 July each year. If paid parental leave is paid, Best Start payments will begin after the last paid parental leave payment. A preterm baby payment may also be available if a baby is born before the end of the 36th week of gestation. Up to 13 weeks of preterm baby payments may be paid, commencing on the date of birth of the child and ending on the date the 36th week of gestation would have ended had the child not been born prematurely. An employee is entitled to paid parental leave if they have worked for the same employer for an average of 10 hours each week (with at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month) in the 6 or 12 months immediately before the baby’s due date, or the date they assume care of a child they intend to adopt. There are different leave entitlements for employees depending on whether they meet the 6or 12-month criteria. A self-employed person is entitled to at least the minimum rate of $189 before tax each week of paid parental leave if they have worked for an average of 10 hours each week in the 6 or 12 months immediately before the baby’s due date or the date they assume care of a child they intend to adopt.  Also see IR leaflets IR 201, “Working and raising a family?”, December 2020 and IR 753, “Support for you and your baby”, July 2020. COVID-19 – temporary changes affecting paid parental leave The government amended the paid parental leave legislation with effect from 25 March 2020 to ensure that some workers on parental leave who temporarily returned to work during the COVID-19 pandemic would not lose their parental leave entitlements. A person will not lose their paid parental leave entitlement if either of the following apply to the person: ▪ their skills, experience or qualification mean nobody else can fill their role, or ▪ there is unusually high demand for workers in their role. A person can return to work for up to 12 weeks and then go back on to paid parental leave. While back at work, the following will apply: ▪ The person will stop receiving paid parental leave. ▪ The person will receive Best Start payments if applied for. ▪ The weeks worked will not be deducted from the maximum period the person can be on parental leave, including extended leave. ▪ The parental leave entitlement cannot be transferred to the person’s spouse or partner during the period the person temporarily returns to work. Law: IT07 ss MD 11, MD 12, MD 12B, MD 16, MF 7  ¶12-150 Abating WFF tax credit The family tax credit (FTC) and the in-work tax credit (or child tax credit) are subject to abatement once the taxpayer’s family scheme income exceeds certain thresholds. “Family scheme income” is a  person’s net income recalculated for the purposes of determining the level of entitlement to a Working for Families (WFF) tax credit under s MD 2. See ¶12-125. The abatement is first applied to reduce any FTC, with the remainder, if any, being applied to the in-work tax credit (or child tax credit). The family credit abatement is calculated as follows: full-year abatement × number of days in the entitlement period ÷ 365 Full-year abatement From 1 July 2018 the full-year abatement rate is 25¢ for each dollar of family scheme income in excess of $42,700. If a person has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, this threshold will be applied to the family scheme incomes of both parties. For example, if a couple works in excess of 30 hours per week and earns $70,000 of family scheme income in a tax year, the full-year abatement would be ($70,000 − $42,700) × 0.25 = $6,825. Number of days in entitlement period The number of days in the entitlement period excludes the calendar months in which a person is a “protected FTC” recipient. Under s MD 14, a person is a “protected FTC” recipient for a calendar month in an entitlement period if, in the calendar month, the person: ▪ has no spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, receives an income-tested benefit (see ¶12-125) and derives annualised family scheme income that is less than the threshold amount in s MD 13(3)(a) (currently $42,700), or ▪ has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, receives an income-tested benefit and their combined annualised family scheme income derived is less than the threshold amount. The following apply when calculating the family scheme income for the purposes of s MD 14: ▪ income derived from employment or from an income-tested benefit (see ¶12-125) is not treated as having been derived at a  uniform daily rate throughout the period of employment or receipt of the benefit, as the case may be ▪ extra pays derived in a calendar month are excluded, and ▪ if a person derives, for part of an income year, a shareholderemployee salary from a close company with no tax deducted, or income from a business, the income derived and the expenditure incurred are treated as having been derived and incurred at a uniform daily rate throughout that part of the income year. Abatement threshold adjustments The threshold at which WFF tax credits begins to abate is no longer automatically indexed to inflation. However, the abatement threshold can be changed by an Order in Council which must be made where the total percentage increase in the movement in the New Zealand Consumers Price Index measured from the previous inflation adjustment round or 1 July 2018 is more than 5%, refer to s MF 7(1) (a) and (2). An Order in Council made to increase family scheme thresholds must be made no later than 1 December each year and must apply from the following 1 April. See s MF 7. Note that the FTC continues to be automatically indexed to inflation (see ¶12-135). See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 24. Law: IT07 ss MD 2, MD 13–MD 16, MF 4F, MF 4G, MF 7  ¶12-160 Minimum family tax credit The minimum family tax credit provisions ensure a minimum takehome income for all full-time earners with dependent children, in addition to WFF tax credits (ie the family tax credit, the in-work tax credit and the Best Start tax credit less the credit abatement). The minimum family tax credit is aimed at supplementing the income of working families with dependent children to a guaranteed after-tax income. The prescribed amount used to calculate the minimum family tax credit may be increased by Order in Council. The  prescribed amount the 2020–21 tax year is $29,432. (Note that the prescribed amount for the 2020–21 year was originally set at $27,768. However, in response to COVID-19, the amount was retrospectively increased in December 2020.) The prescribed amount for the 2021–22 and later tax years is $30,576. In a two-parent family, the minimum family tax credit is paid to the “principal caregiver” (ie the parent who has primary responsibility for the day-to-day care of a dependent child other than on a temporary basis — see ¶12-120). It should be noted that certain persons are not eligible for the minimum family tax credit. These include persons receiving income-tested benefits, veterans’ pensions, New Zealand superannuation, contract payments to non-resident contractors or student allowances. The minimum family tax credit is based on the entitlement period and on the number of weeks within the entitlement period that the claimant is a “full-time earner” (see below). It is calculated on the basis of “net family scheme income” under the formula provided for the purposes of that definition in s ME 3. The definition of “net family scheme income” ensures that the minimum family tax credit is calculated from a base of after-tax income. The formula to be used for calculating the amount of minimum family tax credit available to a qualifying person depends on whether that person has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner. A “spouse” for the purposes of this section does not include a person who is living separately and apart from the qualifying person. See s YA 1. For a qualifying person who is the principal caregiver and who has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner during the entitlement period the minimum family tax credit for the 2021–22 tax year is calculated as follows: ($30,576 − net family scheme income) × number of weeks as a fulltime earner ÷ 52 For a person who has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner during an entitlement period, the amount of “net family  scheme income” included in the formula is the net family scheme income of the taxpayer or his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner or both of them. Full-time earner A full-time earner is a single person engaged in “employment” at least 20 hours per week or a person (either married, in a civil union or in a de facto relationship) who is working at least 30 hours per week or whose hours of work aggregated to those of his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner total 30 hours per week or whose spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner is engaged in full-time employment for at least 30 hours per week. Allowance is made for persons receiving paid parental leave, preterm baby, accident compensation payments or earnings compensation under the Compensation for Live Organ Donors Act 2016 who would otherwise be full-time earners. See discussion of full-time earner in ¶12-140. Employment For the purposes of subpart ME, “employment” is defined in s ME 2 as referring to the activity a person performs that gives rise to an entitlement to a PAYE income payment. However, for the purposes of the definition the following classes of PAYE income payment are excluded: ▪ payments to a working partner ▪ payments of income-tested benefits, veterans’ pensions, New Zealand superannuation and a retirement lump sum paid under Pt 5, subpart 7 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014 ▪ payments of student allowances and independent circumstances grants ▪ contract payments to a non-resident contractor ▪ payments made by a close company to a major shareholder in that company (a major shareholder is a person who either owns  or controls or has the right to acquire at least 10% of the shares or voting rights in the company or has by any other means at least 10% of the control of the company) ▪ payments made by a person to their spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, or ▪ payments made by a business conducted jointly by two or more persons to a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner of any of those persons. Provision is made for work performed on an intermittent basis. A person who receives a payment relating to a day on which that person did not actually perform any (or sufficient) work to give rise to a payment is treated as having performed sufficient work to justify the payment. The Commissioner determines the extent of the work treated as having been performed that day after taking into account such relevant matters as the pay period and surrounding circumstances. Law: IT07 ss MA 7, MC 6, ME 1–ME 3, YA 1  ¶12-165 Best Start tax credit The Best Start tax credit applies from 1 July 2018 and replaced the parental tax credit. It is a payment of up to $3,120 a year (or $60 per week) per child to help families with the costs in a child’s early years, until the child turns three. It is available to all families in the first year of a child’s life. For the second and third years, support continues for low- and middle-income families, with the credit abating at 21¢ for every dollar that exceeds $79,000. If paid parental leave is paid, Best Start payments will begin after the last paid parental leave payment. See ¶12-145. See also IR leaflet IR 753, “Support for you and your baby”, July 2020. Eligibility  A Best Start tax credit applies to a person who is eligible to receive a WFF tax credit (see ¶12-120) if: ▪ the person is a principal caregiver for the dependent child during the entitlement period, and ▪ the dependent child is less than three years old and was born on or after 1 July 2018 (or before 1 July 2018 if the child’s expected due date was on or after that date). Amount of credit The amount of a Best Start tax credit is calculated under the following formula: Best Start tax credit − credit abatement Best Start tax credit A person’s Best Start tax credit for an entitlement period for a dependent child is calculated as follows: prescribed amount × days ÷ 365 where: prescribed amount is $3,120, and days is the number of days in the entitlement period. A person continues to be entitled to the Best Start tax credit for four weeks after a dependent child dies provided they continue to meet the eligibility requirements. The Best Start tax credit is apportioned on the basis of the time that a dependent child spends in the exclusive care of another qualifying person during the entitlement period. Credit abatement The Best Start credit abatement is calculated as follows: full-year abatement × number of days in the entitlement period ÷ 365 Full-year abatement  The full-year abatement is 21¢ for each dollar of family scheme income in excess of $79,000. If a person has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, this threshold will be applied to the family scheme incomes of both parties. For a discussion of family scheme income, see ¶12-125. A “spouse” for these purposes does not include a person who is living separately and apart from the qualifying person. See s YA 1. Number of days in entitlement period The number of days in the entitlement period excludes: ▪ the days on which the dependent child is less than one year old ▪ the calendar months in which the person is a “protected Best Start tax credit” recipient. Under s MG 4, a person is a “protected Best Start tax credit” recipient for a calendar month in an entitlement period if, in the calendar month, the person: ▪ has no spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, receives an income-tested benefit (see ¶12-125) and derives annualised family scheme income that is less than the $79,000 threshold amount, or ▪ has a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, receives an income-tested benefit, and their combined annualised family scheme income derived is less than the threshold amount. Increases in amounts The prescribed amount may be increased by Order in Council to take into account the movement in the New Zealand Consumers Price Index (in other words, the amounts may be adjusted for inflation), rounded up to the nearest whole dollar. The first increase must be made if the index number has moved 5% or more from the index that applied on 1 July 2018. Subsequent to that, an Order must be made if the index number moves 5% or more from the date of the last adjustment. The abatement threshold may also be increased by  Order in Council. Any Order must be made no later than 1 December each year and must apply from the following 1 April. Law: IT07 subpart MG, ss MA 8, YA 1  ¶12-170 End-of-year tax credit and assessment for WFF tax credits A person entitled to WFF tax credits must sign and file an application form (FS 1) and an annual tax return. The combined amount of the abating WFF tax credit, minimum family tax credit and, from 1 July 2018, Best Start tax credit is a person’s total tax credit under the family scheme for a tax year. Family scheme tax credits are then set off against the person’s income tax liability and any surplus may be transferred under the tax transfer rules (see ¶2-148) or is refunded in accordance with ss LA 4, LA 5(5) and LA 7. Any interim family tax credit instalments that have been incorrectly allowed during the tax year are adjusted for in the year-end assessment. To claim a credit of tax on account of any child the Commissioner must be provided with the child’s tax file number, birth certificate, or other evidence acceptable to the Commissioner in verifying the child’s birth or existence. This information must be provided for each child in respect of whom a credit is claimed. The Commissioner is empowered by s MF 5 to recover excess family tax credits paid as if they were income tax payable. Statement of family scheme income If a person receives weekly or fortnightly tax credit payments, the person will also receive a notice of entitlement for a tax year (see ¶12-175). At the end of the tax year, the person must give the Commissioner, within the time in which they are required to file their tax return, a complete statement of their family scheme income for the tax year, including the family scheme income of their spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner, as applicable. The exception is if the only tax credit the person expects to be entitled to for the tax year is the Best Start tax credit and all dependent children will be less than one year old on the last day of the tax year.  A person does not have to provide the family scheme income of their spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner if that other person submits their own separate family scheme income declaration form. Adjustment for additional pay days Any overpayment of Working for Families tax credits (being an abating WFF tax credit, a minimum family tax credit or, from 1 July 2018, a Best Start tax credit) received by a taxpayer who receives interim payments (see ¶12-175) throughout the year as a result of there being an extra pay day in the year will be written off. This adjustment was introduced to encourage taxpayers to apply for interim payments to assist with day-to-day living expenses, rather than waiting for an end-of-year lump sum payment. See s 80KW of the Tax Administration Act. Adjustment for credits used A person’s tax credit is adjusted if an instalment of credit is used to satisfy a tax liability from an earlier income year. See ss LB 4(2) and 80KLB of the Tax Administration Act. Law: IT07 ss LA 4, LA 5(5), LA 7, LB 4, MF 5, MF 6; TAA ss 41, 80KLB, 80KV, 80KW  ¶12-175 Application for interim instalments of WFF tax credits A person who expects to be entitled to WFF tax credits for a particular period in a tax year may apply to receive advance interim instalments of the tax credit rather than wait for it to be applied as an annual adjustment to his or her tax liability. An application to receive family scheme payments by instalments must satisfy all of the following criteria: ▪ it must be in the prescribed form (form FS 1) ▪ it must be signed by the applicant and his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner (including a person who, at the  time the application is made, expects to be a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner in the elected period) ▪ (unless the only tax credit the person expects to be entitled to is the Best Start tax credit and all dependent children will be less than one year old on the last day of the tax year) for each signatory, a complete statement of the family scheme income that is expected to be attributable to the tax year and to the elected period must be given ▪ an election must be made for either weekly or fortnightly payments, and ▪ any other information that the Commissioner may require must be included. In addition, (unless the only tax credit the person expects to be entitled to is the Best Start tax credit and all dependent children will be less than one year old on the last day of the tax year) the information listed below must accompany an application for interim instalments: ▪ evidence of the amount of income from employment derived by each signatory in the month immediately before the date of application, or ▪ for a signatory who expects to derive income from a business, a copy of either of the following: □ the annual accounts of the business for the last tax year immediately before the tax year that contains the elected period □ if the annual accounts for the last tax year have not been completed, the accounts for the tax year immediately before the last tax year □ a set of budgeted accounts for the tax year that contains the elected period, or  □ other evidence that is acceptable to the Commissioner in relation to the business for the tax year that contains the elected period, and ▪ the tax file number of each child in relation to whom a credit of tax is claimed or, except in the case of an application made by an adoptive parent, for a child who has died or is given up for adoption, a birth certificate or other evidence acceptable to the Commissioner that verifies the birth or existence of the child. In the case of a person who only expects to be entitled to the Best Start tax credit and whose dependent children will be less than one year old on the last day of the tax year, only the additional information specified in the last bullet point of the above list is required to accompany the person’s application. No evidence of the amount of income derived from employment is required to accompany the application for interim instalments if the Commissioner considers that she has sufficient evidence of this. If there is no tax file number accompanying the application, but the application is otherwise complete, the interim payments will be made for a period of eight weeks and then will cease pending that evidence being provided. Notice of entitlement Upon receiving the application, the Commissioner is required to determine the estimated tax credit entitlement and issue a notice to the person specifying the amount of WFF tax credits payable. A notice of entitlement so issued is not transferable. The Commissioner may also specify the level of contribution by the relevant tax credits to the total interim instalments due (after abatement). Payments are made by way of tax credit. See below and ¶12-180. Calculation of estimated allowance for interim instalments of WFF tax credits The Commissioner estimates a person’s WFF tax credit entitlement in terms of s MF 3. This involves calculating an amount referred to  as the annual amount under sch 31 of the Income Tax Act 2007 in accordance with a prescribed formula. The WFF tax credit is then calculated with reference to that deemed annual amount. The amount of any interim instalment of WFF tax credits will be calculated with reference to the annual amount determined in accordance with sch 31 and the relevant tax credit rates prescribed in subparts MA to MG and MZ. Law: IT07 ss MF 1, MF 3, MF 4, sch 31; TAA ss 80KA–80KF  ¶12-180 Payment of interim instalments of WFF tax credits by the Chief Executive Recipients of income-tested benefits may not apply to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue for interim instalments of WFF tax credits. Such payments fall under the jurisdiction of the Chief Executive of the department responsible for the Social Security Act (the Chief Executive), ie the Ministry of Social Development. Unless the Chief Executive and the Commissioner agree that the Commissioner will pay the WFF tax credits, the Chief Executive must make a payment of WFF tax credits at the same time as paying an income-tested benefit, so long as he or she considers the recipient to be entitled and: ▪ the family credit abatement or, from 1 July 2018, the Best Start credit abatement is nil, or ▪ in any other case, the Chief Executive is authorised to make such payment in accordance with an Order in Council made under s 225A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The method for determining the WFF tax credit payable is set out in s 80KO of the TAA. This is largely the same method as that adopted by the Commissioner. See ¶12-185. It also requires the Chief Executive to take into account the rate of family tax credit and Best Start tax credit and the family credit abatement and Best Start credit abatement.  Special provisions are made to allow for the Chief Executive, in consultation with the Commissioner, to continue making payment of the family tax credit and the Best Start tax credit if the person concerned ceases to receive an income-tested benefit and applies to the Chief Executive for the credits to continue. The Chief Executive may also request the Commissioner to accept an application for a notice of entitlement in cases where a person is eligible for payment but falls outside the Chief Executive’s jurisdiction. Such a request may also be revoked if payment subsequently falls back into the Chief Executive’s jurisdiction. Persons entitled to payment may ask the Chief Executive to cease payments and then recommence payments at their discretion. The Chief Executive must deliver details of all WFF tax credits paid for a particular month in a manner agreed by the Chief Executive and the Commissioner. Law: IT07 s MF 2; TAA ss 80KN–80KT  ¶12-185 Payment of interim instalments by Commissioner Interim instalments of Working for Families tax credits (WFF tax credits) are made by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue in accordance with the relevant notice of entitlement (see ¶12-175). These payments are generally made by direct credit. Accordingly, applicants for family scheme credits must provide details of their bank account with one of the following institutions: ▪ any registered bank within the meaning of the term in s 2 of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 ▪ any building society ▪ the Public Service Investment Society Ltd, or ▪ a credit union within the meaning of s 2 of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act 1982.  In cases where a notice of entitlement has been unduly delayed, the Commissioner has the discretion to make a suitable payment of tax credit to make up for the delay. Arrears of tax credits for families may be paid in the case of transition-to-work customers (ie those persons who are no longer entitled to payments of tax credits by the Chief Executive of the department responsible for the Social Security Act but who are entitled to payment by IR). If, as a result of the information supplied by the Chief Executive, a person is entitled to a family tax credit or a Best Start tax credit, the Commissioner must make interim payments of the credit without abatement. The payment of interim instalments will begin on the day following the day on which the person is entitled to an income-tested benefit, an orphan’s benefit or an unsupported child’s benefit or to a payment of WFF tax credits by the Chief Executive. The payments will end on the day preceding the first day specified in a notice of entitlement or the day that is the end of a period of not more than eight weeks after the day on which payments begin, whichever is the earlier. The eight-week period (or part thereof) is reduced by any period in respect of which payment is made by the Chief Executive. Working for Families tax credits excluded income WFF tax credits are deemed to be excluded income derived by the person to whom the credit of tax is allowed. Advice in determining entitlement In determining a person’s entitlement to family scheme credits, the Commissioner may, if she considers it necessary, obtain the advice of the Chief Executive or, as the case may be, the General Manager of Veterans’ Affairs. Notification of change in circumstances A person holding a notice of entitlement for interim instalments must advise the Commissioner immediately when any of the following events occur:  ▪ the holder, or his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, commences or ceases to be the principal caregiver of any child where it is expected that this change will last for more than 56 consecutive days (eight weeks) ▪ the holder commences or ceases to be a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner in relation to another person ▪ any event happens that is specified in the notice of entitlement ▪ any other event happens that the person considers may affect his or her entitlement to the tax credit, or ▪ the notice of entitlement is lost or destroyed. The Commissioner may require an incorrect notice to be returned for cancellation or replacement. Also, if the Commissioner is advised by the Chief Executive that a person is also receiving a credit of tax from the Chief Executive, the Commissioner may request that the notice be returned. A notice of entitlement is subject to the terms and conditions stipulated; it is not transferable and it is invalid if altered. Law: IT07 ss MA 3, MA 5; TAA ss 80KE, 80KG–80KLB, 80KU  DEPRECIATION Introduction to depreciation regime  ¶13-010  General Concepts  ¶13-014  Calculation of Depreciation Loss  ¶13-104  Depreciation Recovery Income  ¶13-300  Specific Assets and Events  ¶13-380  Records  ¶13-650  ¶13-010 Introduction to depreciation regime The depreciation regime allows a deduction for the cost of a capital asset. That deduction is a portion of the cost of the asset over its life calculated at a rate prescribed for the asset. Where an asset has no cost, it may be attributed with a market value. Allowing a deduction for depreciation may be regarded as being in conflict with the capital/revenue distinction incorporated in an income tax system. The proposition that depreciation represents a deduction for capital was the basis for the early confirmation from the courts that depreciation was not a permissible deduction on general principles, even though business and accounting conventions supported the recognition of a deduction for depreciation. See Alianza Co Ltd v Bell [1906] AC 18. The alternative perspective is that the absence of depreciation would lead to an overstatement of a year’s profits. The use of a capital asset contributes to the production of the year’s profits. The asset will eventually wear out and need to be replaced. It is sensible to make an allowance for the cost of replacement in the calculation of the year’s profits. The cost of earning each year’s profits is the accumulating expense of replacement.  The concept of depreciation involves some deterioration of an asset. A depreciation loss is unlikely to occur merely because the asset in question cannot be employed on a profitable basis. In Para Handkerchief and Textiles (1964) Ltd v C of IR (1992) 14 NZTC 9,125, the High Court confirmed that no depreciation allowance was available for a sauna and pool complex that was operated at a loss for seven months before being sold. The assets had not become useless. Their income-producing capabilities had been affected by the business failure of their owner. At the same time, the High Court noted that some assets could quickly become useless because of rapid technological change, and that depreciation for them might be appropriate. A deduction is allowed to the extent that a depreciation loss is incurred in deriving assessable income, excluded income or a combination of the two. A deduction is also allowed to the extent that the depreciation loss is incurred in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving those kinds of income. A depreciation loss is treated as having been incurred in the income year in which it is calculated. It is explained in s EE 1(1) that the provisions of subpart EE provide for the calculation of a depreciation loss that is potentially allowed as a deduction. Those provisions also provide for the quantification of depreciation recovery income that may arise on the disposal of depreciable property. Very broadly, depreciation is an annual deduction calculated by applying the rates of depreciation as published by the Commissioner to the cost, or the reducing cost, of the depreciable property. Those rates are set out in CCH, New Zealand Depreciation Rates. A depreciation loss ceases to be available when the annual depreciation loss reduces the cost of the asset to nil. It is possible to elect that an asset is not depreciable property. On doing so, a deduction for the property’s depreciation loss is extinguished and cannot be revived. Depreciation loss  The following features must be present before a person will incur a depreciation loss for an income year: ▪ the person owns property ▪ the property is depreciable property ▪ the property is used, or is available for use by the person in the income year, and ▪ the depreciation loss is calculated under subpart EE. A depreciation loss is calculated on a monthly basis. The depreciation loss reflects the number of months in the income year in which the depreciable property is used or is available for use. Generally, the rates of depreciation published by the Commissioner are applied for the appropriate number of months to the adjusted tax value of the depreciable property. Those rates have been set on the basis of the Commissioner’s assessment of the estimated useful life of the property. As an alternative, an application may be made to the Commissioner for the adoption of a special rate for specific property. Whether the depreciation loss as calculated is allowed as a deduction depends on whether the circumstances satisfy the requirements of the general permission. The general permission requires that the property assists with the generation of assessable income. Subject to exceptions for buildings and petroleum assets, no depreciation loss is calculated in the income year in which depreciable property is disposed of. For that income year, it is necessary to ascertain whether the disposal gives rise to depreciation recovery income. A calculation of depreciation recovery income may result in income or in a further depreciation loss, depending on values. The capital limitation does not apply to an amount of depreciation loss merely because the item of property is itself of a capital nature. Depreciation recovery income  An early disposal of the asset for more than its then adjusted tax value creates an item of depreciation recovery income. Income is imputed on the footing that the profitable sale indicates that previous depreciation has been too generous. The profitable sale shows that, in the result, an incorrect depreciation loss has been incurred in previous income years. There is rectification through the recognition of depreciation recovery income. If the calculation of depreciation recovery income reveals a loss, a further deduction for that loss is allowed. The loss shows that the depreciation loss of earlier income years was too conservative. No deduction for a loss of this kind is allowed for buildings and petroleum assets. Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DA 4, EE 1  GENERAL CONCEPTS ¶13-014 Ownership of depreciable property The notion of the ownership of depreciable property is defined in s EE 2 to mean legal or equitable ownership. If ownership of the property is shared with other persons, each joint owner is attributed with the ownership of that person’s interest in the depreciable property. This treatment applies, for example, to depreciable property owned by the partners of a partnership. Reservation of title A buyer of depreciable property who does not have title may still be treated as the owner of the property by s EE 3. A buyer who enters into an unconditional contract to purchase goods, but whose title to the goods does not pass until the purchase price has been paid in full, is treated as the owner of the goods for depreciation purposes from the later of the time the contract is entered into and the time possession is taken. The buyer will cease to be treated as the owner if the seller subsequently repossesses the goods.  Example 1: Fruity Ltd is a fruit juice manufacturer. On 1 June 20X3, the company entered into a contract to purchase a new juice machine for $21,000. Payment was made by three equal monthly instalments starting on the date of delivery. The contract also stated that no title would pass to Fruity Ltd until all payments had been received by the seller. Delivery of the machine was made on 1 September 20X3. Fruity Ltd would like to know how the purchase is to be treated for tax purposes. Fruity Ltd can claim a depreciation loss for the machine from the time it took delivery on 1 September 20X3. Assuming the diminishing value method is adopted, the depreciation loss for the 20X3–X4 income year is $1,593 (13.0% × 21,000 × 7/12).  If the depreciable property is repossessed, the buyer is deemed to have disposed of the asset at cost, less the net amount already paid to the seller. Example 2: Home Security Ltd enters into an agreement to buy electronic equipment under a reservation of title contract but later defaults, and the equipment is repossessed. The terms were: $ Purchase price  10,000  Amount paid by Home Security Ltd  5,000  Asset repossessed and the seller refunds  3,000  Net payment for the equipment  2,000  Home Security Ltd is deemed to have sold the asset for $8,000, and, therefore, the depreciation recovery income is calculated on the basis of a deemed sale price of $8,000. The seller of the equipment is unable to claim a depreciation loss for the period during which Home Security Ltd was treated as the owner of it.  Leases Under an operating lease a lessor’s ownership of a lease asset is not disturbed, so that the lessor remains the owner for depreciation purposes. Under the finance lease and hire purchase regimes, only  the lessee is allowed a deduction for a depreciation loss on the lease asset, even though legally they may not own the asset. Lessees’ improvements Issues concerning the ownership of leasehold improvements most commonly arise in the context of a lease of land. This is because under common law any structure affixed to land becomes part of the land owned by the lessor, even though the lessee may have paid for the cost of the works. For example, a finance company was not able to claim a depreciation loss for machinery and plant it paid to have installed in council flats. Upon the plant and machinery being affixed to the land, it ceased to be equipment “belonging to” the financier. See Melluish (HMIT) v BMI (No 3) Ltd [1995] BTC 381. A lessee of a power plant was not the owner of the plant entitled to claim depreciation, even though the lessee held an option to purchase the power plant. See Bellinz Pty Ltd v FC of T 98 ATC 4634. A large body of case law has developed on the topic of whether improvements are fixtures that are part of the land. A show home may be regarded as a fixture rather than a chattel. See Lockwood Buildings Ltd v Trust Bank Canterbury Ltd (1994) 2 NZ ConvC 191,957; [1995] 1 NZLR 22. The floating jetties attached to piles at a marina have been held to be land. See Auckland City Council v Ports of Auckland Ltd [2000] 3 NZLR 614. Contrary to common law, under s EE 4, a lessee of land may be treated as the owner of any improvements or fixtures that the lessee has added to the land during the term of the lease. The expenditure incurred by the lessee becomes eligible for a deduction as a depreciation loss in the hands of the lessee in the ordinary way. Any structures added to the land by a lessee are treated as not being owned by the lessor or a subsequent purchaser from the lessor. Should the lessee subsequently assign the lessee’s interest in the lease to another person, and the other person pays the lessee for any fixtures or improvements that the lessee has added, the other person is treated as the owner of the additions. That other person  could be the lessor, so that that party may become entitled to a deduction for a depreciation loss following payment to the lessee for the improvements. See s EE 5. Example 3: Mary operates a flower and gift shop from leased premises. During April 20X3, Mary upgraded her shop by replacing old light fittings (cost $10,000), purchasing some ornamental loose furniture (cost $5,000) and adding a large painted shop sign (cost $1,000). Mary would like to know how the costs incurred on the upgrade will be treated for tax purposes. The items are treated as Mary’s, and not the landlord’s, depreciable property. This enables Mary to capitalise and depreciate the costs. Assuming the diminishing value method is adopted, the depreciation loss for the shop upgrade in the 20X3–X4 income year is: $ Light fittings  20% × 10,000 × 12/12  2,000  Loose furniture  20% × 5,000 × 12/12  1,000  Shop sign  10% × 1,000 × 12/12  100  Total depreciation claim  3,100  (Note: the depreciation rates are an example only.)  Law: IT07 ss EE 2–EE 5, EE 45(9), HG 2  ¶13-034 Depreciable property Subject to certain exceptions, the notion of depreciable property is defined in s EE 6 to mean property that, in normal circumstances, might reasonably be expected to decline in value while it is used, or is available to be used, for deriving assessable income or in carrying on a business for deriving assessable income. With effect from 1 April 2019, for the 2019–20 and later income years, this definition was extended to include such property when it is used or available for use in deriving exempt income and it is used in performing research and development activities.  Depreciable property can be either tangible property or intangible property. Depreciable intangible property comprises a range of intangible property rights that are expressly listed in sch 14 (see ¶13440). Property Property is every type of right that is recognised by law, any interest or thing which is legally capable of ownership and which has a value. The Commissioner’s view is that property needs to be able to be defined and identified, have a degree of permanence or stability and be able to be transferred. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 12, December 2003 at 21. Property does not include knowledge. See Commr of Stamp Duties (NSW) v JV (Crows Nest) Pty Ltd 86 ATC 4740. Nor does it include a concept such as the ability to conduct a business. See Manrell v The Queen 2003 DTC 5225. However, property can include a water diversion licence entitling the holder to draw water from a local river for irrigation purposes. See Australian Rice Holdings P/L v Commr of State Revenue (Vic) 2002 ATC 4052. For depreciation purposes, the term “property” is defined in s YA 1 to include resource consents granted in or after the 1996–97 tax year. Property that is not depreciable property Some property is specifically excluded by s EE 7 from being depreciable property. The following types of property are not depreciable property: ▪ land other than depreciable intangible property, although buildings, fixtures and the land improvements listed in sch 13 continue to be eligible for treatment as depreciable property ▪ a lease of land with a perpetual right of renewal ▪ trading stock ▪ livestock subject to the valuation regime in subpart EC ▪ financial arrangements  ▪ excepted financial arrangements (other than depreciable intangible property) ▪ property that the owner has a right to be compensated for if there is any decline in value upon disposal ▪ certain engine overhaul components of an aircraft (see s DW 5 and ¶10-127) ▪ property that the owner elects to treat as not being depreciable property ▪ property that the owner elects to treat as a low value asset ▪ property that another person may deduct the cost of, and ▪ property whose cost is deductible under some other provision outside the depreciation regime. Case F4 (1983) 6 NZTC 59,583 illustrates how the exclusion for property accompanied by a right to compensation applies. The case involved a financier who acquired and leased out premises for 10 years, subject to an option by which the lessee could be compelled to purchase the premises. The purchase price payable upon exercise of the option ensured that the financier would recoup the cost of any improvements added to the premises by the financier over the term of the lease. Since the financier would recover the cost of this capital expenditure, no deduction for a depreciation loss is allowed. Might reasonably be expected to decline in value The Court of Appeal has made obiter comments on the requirement for an asset to reasonably be expected to decline in value in order to be depreciable. In Queenstown Airport Corporation Ltd v C of IR (2017) 28 NZTC ¶23-002, the Court of Appeal confirmed the Commissioner’s disallowance of depreciation deductions for runway end safety areas (RESA) on the basis that the RESA was not within the improvements listed in sch 13 of the Income Tax Act. Having  reached this conclusion, it was not strictly necessary for the court to consider whether, in normal circumstances, the RESA might reasonably be expected to decline in value while used or available for use. However, the Court of Appeal went on to make the following points on this issue: ▪ The reference to normal circumstances refers to circumstances that might ordinarily be expected to affect the value of the relevant asset over time. Abnormal circumstances, of which an earthquake might be one, are excluded from consideration. ▪ The assessment is ordinarily made at the time the relevant deduction is sought. Necessarily, this will involve a prediction of future events. ▪ The test is objective in the sense that it would not be sufficient for a taxpayer to believe that the asset might deteriorate over time and therefore decline in value. There must be a reasonable basis for that expectation. ▪ The expression “might reasonably be expected to decline in value” sets a relatively low threshold. So long as there is a reasonable prospect that the asset might decline in value in the future, that is sufficient. ▪ It is not necessary that the asset is actually used, only that it is available for use. ▪ The test does not mean the asset in question must require complete replacement at the end of its useful life. Nevertheless, the extent, nature and cost of any work required to reinstate the relevant asset may have a material bearing on the assessment of whether a decline in value might reasonably be expected. Election that an asset is not depreciable property Under s EE 8, a taxpayer may elect that an asset is never depreciable property or that it ceases to be depreciable property where no depreciation has actually been claimed by the taxpayer.  The election is made by a notice in the tax return for the year of acquisition or cessation. An election may also be retrospective in the sense that an election can be made in relation to an asset that has never been the subject of a claim to deduct a depreciation loss. A taxpayer may make an election that an asset is not depreciable property where depreciation recovery income is anticipated upon disposal of the property. However, even in those circumstances, there remains a timing advantage for the taxpayer to claim depreciation over the life of the asset, if only to have it “clawed back” later on the subsequent disposal. Law: IT07 ss EE 6–EE 8, EE 62, EE 67, YA 1, sch 14  ¶13-044 Depreciable property must be used or available for use A depreciation loss will only arise if depreciable property owned by the person is used, or is available for use, by the person during the income year. Depreciable property can continue to be treated as available for use, even though it may temporarily be subject to repair or an inspection. A temporary rule applies for assets affected by the Canterbury earthquakes (see below). A business sometimes finds that it is desirable to cease using an asset to produce assessable income, such as during a period of retraction. Alternatively, an asset may not always be able to be used to generate assessable income, such as when a rental property becomes vacant upon the departure of tenants. On such occasions, a deduction for a depreciation loss may continue to be allowed even though the asset is not being used, because the asset is still available for use. The following examples are adapted from examples given by the Commissioner.  Example 1: In April 20X3, Margaret purchased equipment in anticipation of setting up a florist business in the near future. The business did not, in fact, commence until March 20X4. The depreciation deduction for Margaret’s 20X3–X4 income year is restricted to one-twelfth of the yearly depreciation claim.  Example 2: For a cargo ship in dry dock, the carrying out of normal ongoing maintenance is an ordinary incidence of the business so that the ship would still be regarded as available for use in carrying on the business.  Example 3: If plant and machinery is complete, but is awaiting the addition of other plant before being put into production, the completed plant and machinery will only qualify for a depreciation deduction if the completed plant is available for use either in isolation or in another production line, if required. However, if a further machine or plant is required to be added to the completed plant and machinery in order to produce a product, a depreciation loss will not be available until that other necessary plant or machinery has been added.  Example 4: A claim for depreciation in respect of stored plant and machinery depends on the degree and time of any reconnection or installation required. If the item (for example, a transformer) is a back-up piece of equipment necessary to keep an operation going, it is regarded as being available for use and depreciable. However, if the stored plant is a new piece of machinery or plant yet to be installed, there is no entitlement to a depreciation loss until the installation process is complete.  Assets affected by the Canterbury earthquakes Access to an item of depreciable property may be restricted due to the effects of the Canterbury earthquakes. Normally, such a restriction would mean that the property is treated as not being used or available for use in deriving assessable income. However, s EZ 72 provides relief to taxpayers where access to depreciable property is denied due to an earthquake related restriction (for example, the property is located in the red zone), and:  ▪ the property was used or available for use immediately before the restriction being imposed, and ▪ the property would be used or available for use but for the restriction, and ▪ the relevant income year is the 2023–24 or earlier income year. The property is treated as being available for use while access is restricted. Law: IT07 ss EE 1(2), EE 10, EZ 72  ¶13-054 Low-value assets for depreciation purposes A low-value item is treated as giving rise to a deduction for the entire cost of purchase in the year of acquisition. In other words, the cost of purchase is deductible on a current year basis. A low-value item is an item with a cost equal to or less than the threshold amount. The cost is the GST-exclusive cost if the taxpayer is a registered person, or the GST-inclusive cost if the taxpayer is not a registered person. The threshold amount is as follows: ▪ $500, if the item is acquired before 17 March 2020 ▪ $5,000, if the item is acquired on or after 17 March 2020 and before 17 March 2021, and ▪ $1,000, if the item is acquired on or after 17 March 2021. Note that the increase of the threshold amount to $5,000 for assets acquired on or after 17 March 2020 and before 17 March 2021 was introduced as a temporary measure to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus for the 2020–21 income year. To be eligible for treatment as a low-value item, the asset must be of a separate nature. It cannot be an asset that was or will become part of another asset that is depreciable property. Another restriction is that the item cannot be purchased from the same supplier at the  same time as other assets to which the same depreciation rate applies. That restriction might apply, for example, to the purchase of a set of tables and chairs where the total cost exceeds the threshold but the cost for each individual item does not. However, if the entire purchase costs less than $500, treatment as a low-value item continues to be available. It may be necessary to recognise depreciation recovery income if a low-value item is sold or applied for private purposes. If the asset is sold, the entire sale proceeds are assessable income in the year in which the asset is sold. If the asset becomes a private asset, the market value of the asset when it is first used privately becomes assessable income. Law: IT07 s EE 38  ¶13-064 Cost of depreciable property Depreciation methods are applied to the cost of depreciable property, or to its market value in certain circumstances. See further at ¶13-104. Limited guidance on the meaning of cost is given by s EE 54. That provision deals with the impact of GST on cost. Firstly, if the person is registered for GST, the amount of any input tax is deducted from the property’s cost. Secondly, the cost is increased by the amount of “deductible output tax” for the income year. Briefly, “deductible output tax” includes any input tax that is not claimable at the time of acquisition because the asset will not be fully applied to a taxable purpose. It also includes any output tax payable when an asset that was acquired for a taxable purpose is subsequently applied for a non-taxable purpose. The notion of cost is not confined to an expenditure. It can extend to something given in order to acquire something. For example, a taxpayer who purchased the shares of forest-owning companies and later received a distribution in specie of the forest assets was held to have a cost of timber equating with the cost of the shares. The shares had been purchased as a means of acquiring the forests. The  Court of Appeal rejected the Commissioner’s view that the taxpayer had no cost of timber at all. The Court also thought that the taxpayer’s view of cost equating with market value at the time of distribution was too generous. Factors such as tax liabilities and tax losses may have had an impact on the value of what was received upon the distribution. The cost of the shares purchased to acquire the forests was an appropriate measure of cost. See Tasman Forestry Ltd v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,147. The concept of cost may encompass the economic sacrifice expressed in monetary terms to acquire the asset. This notion led the High Court to conclude that, in the absence of specific provisions on the topic, the cost price of a motor vehicle for fringe benefit tax purposes was the GST-exclusive cost of the vehicle. The employer as a registered person was entitled to a GST input tax deduction for the GST component of the purchase price. See C of IR v Atlas Copco (NZ) Ltd (1990) 12 NZTC 7,327. The cost of the construction of tramways was held to encompass the amount paid by the taxpayer for the works, exclusive of contributions from customers that would benefit from the tramways, as it would in relation to government grants received for the engagement of unemployed persons on construction projects. See Corporation of Birmingham v Barnes (I of T) (1935) 19 TC 195. The notion of cost means the cost of purchase and not the market value at a later date. On this approach, the cost of a residential property purchased as a residence for the taxpayer, but later applied in rental activities, was the initial cost of purchase and not the market value when renting commenced. See Case Q35 (1993) 15 NZTC 5,171. A special rule applies when a private asset is first applied to business use. See ¶13-164. The Commissioner accepts that the concept of cost may include installation costs and the cost of adding accessories. That approach was taken in relation to a discussion on the cost price of a motor vehicle for fringe benefit tax purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 9, September 2003 at 11.  The same perspective on the notion of cost would suggest that the concept may also include: ▪ preliminary costs incurred on exploring the feasibility of purchase of depreciable property ▪ transaction costs such as legal fees documenting purchase of the property ▪ delivery costs such as shipping expenses ▪ installation costs (including wages paid to employees of the purchaser of the depreciable property to effect installation: Christchurch Press Co Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,206). Under s DF 1, when calculating a depreciation loss, expenditure on the acquisition, construction, installation or extension of depreciable property is to be reduced by a grant or subsidy from a local authority or a public authority. Such a grant or subsidy is excluded income of the recipient under s CX 47, unless the grant is a research and development growth grant and the recipient chooses not to treat the payment as excluded income (s CX 47(4)). Consequently, where the amount received is excluded income and is used to acquire, construct, install or extend depreciable property, the amount is not subject to a depreciation claim. Law: IT07 ss DF 1, EE 54  CALCULATION OF DEPRECIATION LOSS ¶13-104 Diminishing value method and straight-line method The depreciation methods for calculating a depreciation loss are: ▪ the diminishing value method, which is defined to mean the subtraction in each income year of a constant percentage of the  item’s adjusted tax value from the adjusted tax value of the asset ▪ the straight-line method, which is defined to mean the subtraction in each income year of a constant percentage of the item’s cost from the adjusted tax value of the asset, or ▪ the pool method, being the diminishing value method applied to a collection of low-cost assets. A person chooses one of these methods by applying it and incorporating the calculation in a tax return. It is possible to change between the diminishing value and straight-line methods from year to year. In the case of the pool method, once it has been adopted in relation to an asset, it must continue to be applied for so long as the asset remains poolable property. The pool method is outlined at ¶13144. Generally, the method chosen is not applied in the income year in which the depreciable property is disposed of. A calculation of depreciation recovery income, if any, is made instead. There are exceptions for certain buildings and petroleum assets, so that a depreciation loss for them may continue to be calculated in the year of disposal. The diminishing value method is not available to be applied for fixed life intangible property. See further at ¶13-450. The straight-line method is available for any item of depreciable property. However, its use is mandatory for fixed life intangible property. The straight-line method and the diminishing value method The same formula applies to the straight-line method and the diminishing value method. The formula is set out in s EE 16, and it reads as follows: annual rate × value or cost × months ÷ 12 where:  annual rate is the annual depreciation rate applicable to the asset value or cost is: ▪ the adjusted tax value of the asset at the end of the previous income year under the diminishing value method, or ▪ cost, less any deduction allowed outside the depreciation regime under the straight-line method (except for patents — see ¶13-540, and plant variety rights — see ¶13-560), and months is 12 or, if less, the number of months the asset is owned and used or available for use in the income year. For a person whose income year is longer than 12 months, “months” is the number of months the asset is owned by the person and is used or available for use. The concept of the annual rate applicable to depreciable property is outlined at ¶13-124. It is always expressed as a decimal. Example 1: On 20 September 20X3, AMB purchased a new bulldozer for $200,000. AMB has a 31 March balance date so that the bulldozer was owned for seven months of the income year, September through to March. No apportionment is required for the ownership for only a part of September. The standard calculation (using the DV rate) is: 13.0% × $200,000 ×  7 12  = $15,167  The claim for a depreciation loss is $15,167. The new adjusted tax value at the start of the 20X4–X5 income year is $200,000 − $15,167 = $184,833.  Special provision is made for the cost of the asset if the person changes from the diminishing value method to the straight-line method for an income year. In that event, cost becomes the adjusted tax value at the end of that income year before the depreciation loss for that year is deducted.  Example 2: Danny operates a printing business and, in the 20X0–X1 income year, he bought a secondhand etching machine for $20,000. The diminishing value rate of 25% was applied to this machine. By the end of the 20X2–X3 income year, it had been depreciated down to $8,437. Danny decided to change from diminishing value to straight-line method from the 20X3–X4 income year. The adjusted tax value before claiming any depreciation for the 20X3–X4 income year is $8,437. According to sch 10, the equivalent straight-line rate to 25% DV is 17.5%. The depreciation loss on the etching machine will be $1,476 (17.5% × $8,437) in each year in which the straightline method is applied.  A change between methods may be made from year to year, but not within a year. The application of the pool method to an asset cannot be changed to a different method. It is possible to make a post-acquisition adjustment to the cost of fixed life intangible property. If additional costs have been incurred for the item, and those costs are not otherwise allowed as a deduction, they may be added to the adjusted tax value at the start of the income year and the formula applied accordingly. Law: IT07 ss EE 11–EE 16, EE 18, EE 19, EE 67  ¶13-124 Annual rate of depreciation The annual rate of depreciation for an item of depreciable property is: ▪ the economic rate (see ¶13-126), special rate, or provisional rate for property not described below, or ▪ for items acquired on or before 20 May 2010, the economic rate, special rate, or provisional rate for the property multiplied by an uplift factor of 1.2 where the property has not previously been depreciable property in New Zealand and the property is not a building, a used imported car or an international aircraft, or ▪ 0% for □ for the 2011–12 to 2019–20 income years, a building  □ from the 2020–21 income year, a residential building that has an estimated useful life of 50 years or more (see ¶13410), or ▪ a diminishing value rate of 15% or a straight-line rate of 10% for an international aircraft (see ¶13-128). The uplift factor of 1.2 (commonly referred to as “depreciation loading”) no longer applies for items acquired after 20 May 2010. Items that were acquired, or for which a binding contract was entered into, or for which expenditure was incurred in relation to its purchase or construction on or before 20 May 2010 continue to be eligible for depreciation loading. Law: IT07 s EE 31  ¶13-126 Economic rates for depreciable property The economic rates for property are set by the Commissioner by determination. The rates are collated into schedules — see below. The Commissioner does not set economic rates for fixed life intangible property or excluded depreciable property (see ¶13-128). Calculation of economic rates To ascertain the economic rate to be applied to an asset (excluding buildings, excluded depreciable property, certain aircraft and vehicles, or property with a high residual value) acquired on or after 1 April 2005 and for the 2005–06 and later income years, the Commissioner applies the formula: 2 ÷ estimated useful life Estimated useful life is expressed in years. Once a figure has been ascertained, it is subject to rounding up or down to the nearest diminishing value rate specified in column 1 of sch 11. The estimated useful life of property (with the exception of copyright in a sound recording) is the period during which the property might  reasonably be expected to be useful in deriving assessable income or in carrying on a business for deriving assessable income. The factors that are taken into account in making any such assessment are: ▪ the passage of time ▪ likely wear and tear ▪ exhaustion and obsolescence, and ▪ normal and reasonable maintenance. In interpretation statement IS 11/01, “Income tax — depreciation: meaning of ‘obsolescence’ in the definition of ‘estimated useful life’ ” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 6, July 2011), the Commissioner sets out his views on the meaning of the term “obsolescence”. The Commissioner’s view is that for obsolescence to affect the estimated useful life of an item there must be reasonable certainty that the item will become obsolete and also a sufficiently clear indication of the time at which this is likely to occur. The estimated useful life for the copyright in a sound recording is the period running from when it is first useful in deriving assessable income until the end of the income year when it might reasonably be expected that 90% of all income from the copyright has been derived. The Commissioner’s estimate of the useful life of an item is usually stated in the relevant depreciation determination. The economic rate determined by the Commissioner applies to property on a class basis. It applies to all assets that can be regarded as being one kind of depreciable property. The rate may also extend to similar kinds of depreciable property if the Commissioner considers that to be appropriate, having regard to the possible rates and any possible reduction in compliance costs. Calculation of economic rates for high residual value property  A different formula is used by the Commissioner when setting the economic rates for high residual value property (ie property with an expected residual market value greater than 13.5% of cost), eg international ocean-going yachts. The rates calculated for assets that have a high residual value are rounded up or down to the nearest rate set out in sch 11 (new banded rates of depreciation). Depreciation schedules The economic depreciation rates set by the Commissioner are collated into schedules. The current schedules of economic depreciation rates are set out in CCH, New Zealand Depreciation Rates. The schedules are split into two: an industry category schedule and an asset category schedule. Perhaps the best way to locate an applicable economic rate is first to determine the date of acquisition of the asset and confirm the correct schedule to use. Then look under the relevant industry category. These include categories for agriculture, horticulture and aquaculture, bakeries, contractors, builders and quarrying, leisure and so on. If the asset in question is not listed under these industry categories, look under general asset categories, such as books, music and manuscripts, building fit-out, computers, office equipment. If an appropriate rate cannot be located from the asset categories, the default rate under the industry or asset category may be used. The rate adopted should be the one that is more appropriate in terms of how the asset is used. Example: Joe operates a takeaway. In April 20X3, Joe purchased a new machine that wraps ready-made sandwiches in cellophane. To find the correct depreciation rate, Joe will need first to review the rates under the industry category “hotels, motels, restaurants, cafes, taverns and takeaway bars”. The machine is not listed under this classification and it is not separately identified under any asset category. However, there is a rate for wrapping machines under the industry category “food processing”. As Joe would use the machine in the same way that this industry would, this rate may be adopted. The correct rate to be applied is 8.5% straight-line or 13% diminishing value.  The table below summarises the appropriate schedule of depreciation rates to be used to determine the rate for an item of depreciable property, depending on its acquisition date. Date of acquisition  Rates  21 May 2010 onwards  New economic rates excluding 20% uplift for new assets (not including residential buildings (before 1 April 2020, buildings), used imported cars, fixed life intangible property, excluded depreciable property or international aircraft)  1 April 2005 to 20 May 2010  New economic rates plus 20% uplift for new assets (not including buildings, used imported cars, fixed life intangible property, excluded depreciable property or international aircraft)  1995–96 to 2004–05 income 1993–2005 economic rates plus year 20% new asset uplift (where applicable) 1 April 1993 to 1994–95 income year  Old schedule rates plus 25% uplift (where applicable) or 1993–2005 economic rates (without new asset uplift)  16 December 1991 to 31 March 1993  Old schedule rates plus 25% uplift (where applicable)  15 December 1991 and earlier  Old schedule rates  Special rate or provisional rate A taxpayer may seek a special rate higher or lower than the economic rate for an item of depreciable property (other than excluded depreciable property and residential buildings (before 1  April 2020, excluded depreciable property, special excluded depreciable property and buildings)) from the Commissioner. A special rate is likely to be appropriate where the person’s use of the depreciable property is so different from normal usage that the standard rate may not reflect the property’s economic life for the person. Operation in corrosive conditions, or in two or three shifts a day, for example, might justify a special rate. In determining a special rate or a provisional rate, the Commissioner can have regard to any relevant factor concerning the property’s estimated useful life. The factors could include an estimate based on a valuer’s report or on the rate used by the person for financial reporting purposes. The Commissioner has indicated that an asset’s estimated useful life will be based upon its expected “whole of life”. The Commissioner also indicated that if an application for a special rate is unresolved by the balance date, the rate currently in use should be applied, subject to amendment if the application is successful. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 7, September 2005 at 40. In interpretation statement IS 10/05, “Depreciation — estimated useful life and lease terms”, the Commissioner has stated that a special rate cannot be obtained based on the length of a lease and the taxpayer’s decision to demolish the particular item at the end of the lease term. For example, a taxpayer enters into a lease for 10 years. The taxpayer seeks a special rate for an item of depreciable property based on the length of the lease, which is 10 years (the usual estimated useful life for such an item is 20 years). The Commissioner will not grant a special rate based solely on the length of the lease. The item of depreciable property may no longer be used by the taxpayer at the end of the lease term, but the Commissioner considers that this does not necessarily make the item useless. The statement is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 8, September 2010 at 7. A taxpayer may also seek a provisional rate for an item of depreciable property where there is no applicable economic rate. No provisional rate can be set for fixed life intangible property or excluded depreciable property.  There is a restriction in s EE 36 preventing a person from reverting to a lower economic rate or to a provisional rate in order to defer deductions for an asset’s depreciation loss. There is an exception to the rules relating to annual rates and special or provisional rates for depreciation adjustments made in respect of overseas leased assets under the finance lease rules. See ¶6-700. Changing rates In April 2015, Inland Revenue released QWBA, QB 15/03, “Income tax — changing to a different depreciation rate for an item of depreciable property”. The item considers whether a taxpayer can change the depreciation rate they use to depreciate an item of depreciable property. The item concludes that a taxpayer can change the depreciation rate in limited circumstances. This is when the depreciation rate used is not or is no longer the depreciation rate that applies to the taxpayer’s particular item of depreciable property. This is the case in the following circumstances: ▪ There is a change in legislation that means a different depreciation rate applies to the item. ▪ The taxpayer changes from using a special rate to using the economic or provisional rate that applies to their item. ▪ The Commissioner sets a new depreciation rate that applies to the item of depreciable property. ▪ The taxpayer has been using an incorrect depreciation rate. ▪ The depreciation rate is no longer applicable due to a change in circumstances. The QWBA explains those circumstances and provides examples showing how they might arise in practice. It is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 4, May 2015 at 30. Law: IT07 ss EE 26, EE 30, EE 35, EE 36, EE 61, EE 63, EE 67, sch 11  ¶13-128 Annual depreciation rates for specific assets There are specific rules for establishing the depreciation rates for: ▪ buildings ▪ fixed life intangible property ▪ excluded depreciable property ▪ international aircraft, and ▪ certain aircraft and motor vehicles. Buildings Before the 2011–12 income year, depreciation was allowed on all buildings. From the 2011–12 income year, buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more had an annual depreciation rate of 0%. Other buildings remained depreciable. With effect from 1 April 2020, for the 2020–21 and later income years, only residential buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have an annual depreciation rate of 0%. Non-residential buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have a depreciation rate of 2% DV or 1.5% SL. For buildings other than those with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more, the annual rate will usually be the building’s economic rate. The Commissioner sets the economic rate for buildings acquired on or after 19 May 2005 (and without a high residual value) by applying the formula in s EE 28: 1 ÷ estimated useful life Estimated useful life is expressed in years. (See the definition of estimated useful life at ¶13-126.) Once a figure has been ascertained, it is subject to rounding up or down to the nearest straight-line rate specified in column 4 of sch 11. No 20% uplift factor is applied to buildings when establishing the annual rate.  Although residential buildings (for the 2011–12 to 2019–20 income years, buildings) with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have a 0% annual rate, they are still considered depreciable property so that a disposal may give rise to depreciation recovery income. Before the 2020–21 income year, to clarify the position that the fit-out of commercial buildings was not subject to the 0% annual depreciation rate, the former definition of “building” excluded commercial fit-outs and grandparented structures (certain structures acquired or for which a binding contract was entered into on or before 30 July 2009). However, with the restriction of the 0% rate to residential buildings from the 2020–21 income year, the building definition and its exclusions for commercial fit-outs and grandparented structures was no longer necessary and it was repealed. For further discussion on the depreciation of buildings, see ¶13-410. Fixed life intangible property The annual rate for fixed life intangible property is the rate calculated using the following formula: 1 ÷ legal life The term “legal life” refers to the remaining legal life of the property from the date of acquisition by the person. That legal life is the property’s term as specified by statute or contract, and it must include any renewal period that is unconditional or conditional upon the payment of predetermined fees. If additional costs have been incurred, the legal life is the remaining legal life for the asset, starting with the income year in which the person incurred the additional costs. The rate given by the formula must be expressed as a decimal and rounded to two decimal places. Numbers at the midpoint or greater are to be rounded up and other numbers rounded down. The definition of “legal life” for a land right, being a lease or licence, includes the term of any consecutive or successive land rights granted over the same parcel of land at the same time to a taxpayer or an associated person as part of the legal life.  Example: Mark acquired the right to use a registered trademark from 1 April 20X3, with a value of $20,000 and a legal life of five years. Under the formula, the depreciation rate Mark would use is: 1 5  = 0.2 or 20%  Mark can claim a deduction for a depreciation loss of $4,000 in each year.  The depreciation rate for patents and design registrations is addressed at ¶13-540. Excluded depreciable property The annual rate for excluded depreciable property is the rate published by the Commissioner for the 1992–93 income year. The Commissioner has no power to change the rate. The concept of excluded depreciable property is defined in s EE 64 to mean depreciable property that is one of the following: ▪ property purchased or to be constructed under a binding contract entered into before 16 December 1991 ▪ property used or available for use in New Zealand before 1 April 1993 (except as trading stock) ▪ property that is an intangible item that was used or available for use before 1 April 1993 ▪ property that is a qualifying asset (being assets that were new and depreciable under the Income Tax Act 1976), or ▪ property that is a qualifying improvement (being expenditure incurred during the period 16 December 1991 to 31 March 1994 under a binding contract entered into in that duration). There is a qualification to this definition. Excluded depreciable property does not include property that existed at the end of the 1992–93 income year and that was accounted for in that income  year under one of the standard value method, the replacement value method or the annual revaluation method. Property of that kind can continue to be treated as depreciable property for the purpose of determining the annual rate for the property. For the 2011–12 to 2019–20 income years, excluded depreciable property also did not include “special excluded depreciable property”. “Special excluded depreciable property” was defined to mean buildings that were not listed under the former sch 39. The items listed in sch 39 were: carports (hired out to householders), portable huts, cool-stores and freezing chambers, slaughterhouses on farms, fowl houses, plastic hothouses and PVC tunnel houses, glasshouses, buildings affected by acid, milking sheds, roofed livestock yards, wintering barns and simple loafing barns, milk powder buildings, temporary buildings, fish processing buildings and tannery buildings affected by acid. In essence, this meant that the depreciation rate for buildings that were not listed in sch 39, and that would otherwise have been excluded depreciable property, was set at 0% (rather than the applicable 1992–93 rate). The buildings included in sch 39 continued to be depreciated at the appropriate rate in the ordinary way. However, with the changes to the depreciation of buildings from the 2020–21 income year, discussed above, these provisions were no longer necessary and the definition of “special excluded depreciable property” and sch 39 were repealed with effect from 1 April 2020 for the 2020–21 and later income years. International aircraft The annual rate for depreciating international aircraft acquired after the 1994–95 income year is 15% under the diminishing value method or 10% under the straight-line method. Other aircraft and motor vehicles Aircraft (fixed wing, self-propelled, non-international, not used for top-dressing or spraying, and not helicopters) are depreciated at 10% DV or 7% SL. Passenger-carrying motor vehicles (with no more than 12 seats) are depreciated at 30% DV or 21% SL.  Law: IT07 ss EE 26, EE 28, EE 29, EE 31, EE 33, EE 61, EE 63, EE 64, EE 67, YA 1, sch 11  ¶13-144 Pool method for depreciable property The pool method is one of the three available methods for calculating a depreciation loss for an income year. The method is to be applied to the person’s poolable property. “Poolable property” is property acquired during the income year for no more than its maximum pooling value. The maximum pooling value is $5,000 or such other value that the Commissioner may have prescribed by a determination for the particular item ($2,000 before the 2015–16 income year). An item can still be poolable property if it had a cost that is more than the maximum, so long as it has an adjusted tax value at the start of the income year that is less than the maximum pooling value. This may come about because prior depreciation losses for the asset have reduced its adjusted tax value below the maximum. Poolable property can also include any property that was subject to the globo accounting method at the end of the 1992–93 income year. In all cases, the property must be wholly used or is available for use in deriving assessable income. Alternatively, to the extent that the property is not wholly used in that manner, it must be used in a way that attracts a liability for fringe benefit tax. If this requirement ceases to be satisfied, the asset is deemed to be disposed of at market value. This may or may not create depreciation recovery income. The asset is deemed to be reacquired at the same market value on that day, allowing a deduction for the depreciation loss to continue to be claimed. A building cannot be an item of poolable property. There is no restriction requiring the creation of only one pool. Several pools of poolable property may be maintained. It is possible to combine pools of depreciable property to form a single pool. The single pool is created by combining the adjusted tax values of each of the pools to total one new adjusted tax value for  the new pool. The former pools and their adjusted tax values cease to exist. There may be additions to or deletions from the pool during the income year. If an asset is acquired for addition to the pool, the adjusted tax value of the pool is increased by the cost of the asset. If an asset, subject to another depreciation method in the previous year, is added to the pool, the adjusted tax value of that asset is added to the pool’s adjusted tax value on the date it is included in the pool, and the asset’s adjusted tax value at the end of the previous income year is added to the starting adjusted tax value of the pool for the income year of addition. Formula for calculating depreciation loss for pool The formula to be applied to calculate the depreciation loss for a pool of depreciable property under the pool method is the following: rate × ((starting adjusted tax value + ending adjusted tax value) ÷ 2) × months ÷ 12 where: rate is the lowest diminishing value rate applicable to any asset in the pool starting adjusted tax value is: — the pool adjusted tax value at the start of the income year, together with the prior year’s adjusted tax value of any items previously separately depreciated that were added to the pool during the income year, or — zero if the pool starts during the income year ending adjusted tax value is the adjusted tax value of the pool at the end of the income year before deduction of the depreciation loss, increased by the cost of the items added to the pool during the income year and decreased by the amount of consideration derived from the disposal of pooled items during the income year (less any disposal costs during the income year), and  months is the number of whole or part months in the income year that the asset is used. This may be more or less than 12 months. Example 1: Adam has a pool of assets, with an adjusted tax value of $18,000 at the beginning of the year. During the year, he purchases three assets for $2,000 each. At the end of the year, Adam decides to include them in the pool. The value of the pool at the end of the income year, before deducting the year’s depreciation loss, is $24,000. The average pool value is: ($18,000 + $24,000)/2 = $21,000 Assuming the DV rate of 25%, the depreciation loss and the adjusted tax value of the pool will be calculated as follows: $ Value of pool at the end of income year 24,000 Less annual depreciation ($21,000 × 25%)  (5,250)  Adjusted tax value of pool  18,750  Disposal of an asset The disposal of an asset from the pool is dealt with by deducting the excess of consideration received upon disposal over expenses incurred in disposing of the asset from the pool’s adjusted tax value. Special rules apply if an amount of insurance, indemnity or compensation is received for damaged assets (see below). If all of the assets of the pool are disposed of, but the adjusted tax value continues to be positive, the depreciation loss for the income year is that positive figure. If the adjusted tax value is negative, the negative amount becomes an item of depreciation recovery income for the income year. Lowest rate used Since the rate of depreciation used for a pool is the lowest rate, care may need to be exercised in the selection of assets included in a pool.  Date pool commences It may be important to consider the date the pool commences, ie when the pooling method is first adopted. The date influences the average pool value. Upon commencement of the pool method partway through the income year, the pool value at the beginning of the income year will be nil. The amount of the depreciation loss will be based on half the pool value at the end of the income year. Example 2: Dan starts a business on 15 May 20X3 and purchases five assets for $2,000 each, which he pools. Dan has a 31 March balance date and uses a depreciation rate of 20% DV. Dan’s 20X3–X4 depreciation loss is calculated as follows: $ Calculate average pool value: Pool value on 1 April 20X3  nil  Pool value at end of year (31 March 20X4)  10,000  Divide by 2 to average  5,000  Calculate annual depreciation: = ($5,000 × 20% × 11 months)/12  $916.66 depreciation loss  The 11 months is 15 May 20X3 to 31 March 20X4.  Assets added to pool If assets that have not previously been separately depreciated are added to the pool at the beginning of an income year, the pool values at both the beginning and the end of the year will increase. If such assets are added to the pool part way through the income year, only the pool value at the end of the year will increase. Example 3: Assuming a 31 March balance date: $  Pool value at 1 April 20X3  5,600  Additions during February 20X4 3,300 Pool value at 31 March 20X4  8,900  Sum of opening and closing value of pool  14,500  Average pool value on which annual depreciation is calculated  $7,250  Insurance or other compensation received for pool items Where an amount of insurance, indemnity or compensation is received for a damaged item in a pool, and that item has not been disposed of during the income year, the excess of the amount received over expenditure incurred because of the damage is deducted from the adjusted tax value of the pool. If a person disposes of a pool item during the income year and receives an amount of insurance, indemnity or compensation for damage to the item before its disposal, the excess of the amount received over expenditure incurred in disposing of the asset is deducted from the adjusted tax value of the pool. Law: IT07 ss EE 21–EE 24, EE 65, EE 66  ¶13-164 Adjusted tax value for an item of depreciable property The notion of adjusted tax value is relevant to the calculation of a year’s depreciation loss. The appropriate rate of depreciation is applied to an asset’s adjusted tax value. By this approach, the adjusted tax value at any time reflects the asset’s cost, as reduced by the depreciation loss for prior years. Depreciation recovery income, if any, is also determined in light of the asset’s adjusted tax value. The adjusted tax value for an item of depreciable property is generally:  base value − total deductions where: base value is the cost or, in certain circumstances, the market value of the depreciable property, and total deductions is the total of all prior deductions for depreciation loss and the amount that would have given rise to deductions for depreciation loss if the property had always been wholly used in the derivation of assessable income. To ascertain the cost of the depreciable property, no amount may be included that is allowed as a deduction under some other provision of the Act. If a private asset becomes committed to the production of assessable income, the base value of the asset is its market value when it is first committed to business use. This is provided that the asset in question is neither a building nor petroleum-related depreciable property. With those two classes of asset, it would be necessary to ascertain cost, and base value, according to the historical cost of the asset. The total deductions amount for the depreciable property is ascertained by taking all deductions that have been allowed for the property and all deductions that would have been allowed if the property had been wholly used in deriving assessable income. This essentially requires a deduction for a depreciation loss to be claimed as and when it becomes available, rather than permitting its deferral to a future period. If deductions have not previously been claimed, the diminishing value method is used to calculate what the deduction for depreciation loss would have been. The requirement to include depreciation deductions that would have been allowed if the property had been used for deriving income does not apply if the property is not available for use in deriving assessable income or carrying on a business. The exception to this is an amount of depreciation deduction available under s EE 39 for an item that is no longer used.  The adjusted tax value for a pool of depreciable property is the total of the adjusted tax values of all items in the pool. There is an exception for depreciation adjustments made in respect of overseas leased assets under the finance lease rules. See ¶6700. Capital contributions A capital contribution is a payment received under an agreement that is to be applied towards the acquisition of capital contribution property under the terms and conditions of the agreement. Capital contribution property includes depreciable property owned or to be acquired by the recipient. Payments made by persons in their capacity as a settlor, partner or shareholder of the recipient are not capital contributions. Note that certain amortisable property under subpart DO, such as farming and aquaculture improvements, and listed horticultural plants, is also capital contribution property (see ¶27-175, ¶27-365, ¶27-400 and ¶27-410). Generally, insurance pay-outs do not come within the definition of “capital contribution”. However, there is an exception for insurance proceeds received in relation to an interruption or impairment of business activities, and the proceeds are used by the recipient to purchase replacement depreciable property. This rule generally applies from the 2011–12 and later tax years. Taxpayers who had taken a different tax position in a tax return filed before 28 August 2012 were not bound by the new rule. Capital contributions received by a person on or after 20 May 2010 are treated as income under s CG 8 in the year of receipt and the following nine income years. A formula in s CG 8(2) requires the amount of the capital contribution be divided by 10. The result is then treated as income in the year of receipt and the following nine years (see also ¶5-356). Alternatively, for capital contribution property that is depreciable property, the person may elect to reduce the amount of the cost, base value, or adjusted tax value (as applicable) by the amount of the capital contribution: s DB 64. The election is made in the  person’s income tax return in the year in which the capital contribution is received. Each new capital contribution requires a new election (see also ¶10-200). If the person elects to reduce the cost, base value or adjusted tax value of the depreciable property, the amount of the capital contribution is added to the amount of depreciation deductions claimed by the person for the purposes of calculating depreciation recovery income. See s EE 48 and ¶13-300. Example: On 1 June 20X3 Bizzy Blooms Ltd receives a payment of $10,000 from its landlord to enter into a new lease. The terms and conditions of the agreement require that Bizzy Blooms Ltd must use the funds towards fit-out of their premises. A total of $12,000 is spent by Bizzy Blooms Ltd on fit-out for the year ended 31 March 20X3. In its 20X3–X4 income tax return, Bizzy Blooms Ltd has two choices in dealing with the $10,000 inducement payment for taxation purposes. It may choose to return onetenth of the $10,000 as income over the next 10 years, beginning with the 20X3–X4 income year. Alternatively, it can choose to reduce the cost of the fit-out by $10,000 for depreciation purposes. If Bizzy Bloom Ltd chooses this option, it will only be able to claim depreciation on the remaining $2,000 of expenditure incurred on the fit-out.  Note that some land-related lease payments can be subject to more than one income-charging provision in the Income Tax Act 2007. For example, lease premiums may be taxable under ss CC 1 and CC 1B and contributions for fit-out costs under ss CC 1B and CG 8. However, the tax treatment of amounts that are already subject to ss CC 1 and CG 8 do not change. The amount is included in income only once (s BD 3(6)) and the new timing rule for lease inducement payments in s EI 4B does not apply to an amount that is income under ss CC 1 and CG 8 (s EI 4B(2)). Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, EE 55–EE 58, EE 60, YA 1  ¶13-174 Partial use of depreciable property to produce income  Depreciable property may be used partly to produce assessable income and partly for some other purpose. Alternatively, the asset may be used in a way that attracts fringe benefit tax. In either event, the depreciation loss for an income year is to be calculated using the formula: depreciation loss × qualifying use days ÷ all days where: depreciation loss is the full year’s depreciation loss for the asset qualifying use days is the number of days in the income year in which the asset was owned and used, or was available for use, to produce assessable income or to attract fringe benefit tax, and all days is the number of days in the income year in which the asset is owned and used or is available for use. The above formula does not apply if the property is a motor vehicle subject to subpart DE, which addresses deductions for motor vehicles used for business purposes. If days are not an appropriate unit of measurement, some other alternative must be adopted. The other unit of measurement can be time, distance or anything else. There are two further methods for calculating the depreciation loss to be used when an asset which is used partially for business purposes is disposed of. See s EE 50(5) and (9). Assets subject to apportionment under mixed-use rules If depreciation deductions are subject to apportionment under the mixed-use asset rules (see ¶10-035) then those rules take precedence over s EE 50. Law: IT07 ss DG 8(3), EE 50  ¶13-184 Improvements to depreciable property  Improvements may be made to depreciable property. For this purpose, an improvement is an alteration, extension or repair of the property that increases its capital value. In the year in which the improvement is carried out, the costs of the exercise are treated as giving rise to depreciation loss for the improvements, separate from the property itself. As a consequence, the improvement costs are subject to a part-year calculation of a depreciation loss under an appropriate depreciation method. The part-year calculation commences with the month in which the improvement is first used or is available for use. In the following income year, the treatment to be applied depends upon the method that had been adopted for the depreciable property. If either the diminishing value method or the straight-line method has been adopted, the person may choose between: ▪ continuing to treat the improvement as a separate item of depreciable property, or ▪ treating the improvement as part of the depreciable property and: □ add the adjusted tax value of the improvement to the property’s adjusted tax value at the start of the income year if the diminishing value method is applied, or □ add the improvement’s adjusted tax value and cost to those applicable to the property at the start of the income year if the straight-line method is applied. Note that before the 2020–21 income year, special rules applied for improvements made on or after 20 May 2010. As a result of the removal of depreciation loading for items purchased after 20 May 2010, if the improvement was made, or if a binding contract to purchase or construct the improvement was entered into, or expenditure was incurred in relation to the purchase or construction of the improvement after 20 May 2010, the improvement had to be treated as a separate item of depreciable property if the item that was improved:  ▪ was a grandparented structure (see ¶13-410), or ▪ was not a building, or ▪ was not a used import car, or ▪ was not an international aircraft, or ▪ had not been used or held for use in New Zealand as depreciable property before the date of acquisition. By treating such improvements as items of separate property, the items were not eligible for depreciation loading. If the pool method has been adopted for the depreciable property, the improvements must continue to be treated as a separate item of depreciable property. Should the cost exceed the maximum pooling value permitted, the improvement and its adjusted tax value must be added to another pool. Law: IT07 ss EE 37, EE 67  ¶13-194 If use of depreciable property stops A person may stop using depreciable property as part of an incomeearning process. It may also be the case that there is no intention for the person or an associate to use the property, and the likely disposal costs are expected to exceed the sale proceeds. In these circumstances, the person is conferred with a depreciation loss equal to the adjusted tax value of the property at the start of the income year. The adjusted tax value at the end of the year becomes zero. This treatment does not apply to: ▪ depreciable property that is subject to the pool method, or ▪ buildings, with the exception of a building that meets all of the following conditions:  □ the building is irreparably damaged and useless for deriving income □ the damage occurred in the 2005–06 or a later income year (or, if earlier, as a result of the February 2004 Manawatu floods or the July 2004 storms in the Bay of Plenty), and □ the damage was not caused by the person or an agent or associate of the person. Law: IT07 s EE 39  DEPRECIATION RECOVERY INCOME ¶13-300 Depreciation recovery income Depreciation recovery income may arise: ▪ on the disposal of depreciable property, or ▪ on the occurrence of an event that must be treated as a disposal. Depreciation recovery income is not calculated in relation to: ▪ petroleum-related depreciable property (see ¶13-550) ▪ intangible property that is excluded depreciable property, other than software ▪ land improvements that were excluded from a depreciation allowance under the Income Tax Act 1976 ▪ the disposal of intangible property, as part of an arrangement to acquire replacement intangible property. This restriction may apply where, for example, computer software is disposed of at a low trade-in value in exchange for an upgraded product. The loss on the trade-in is not recognised under the provisions on depreciation recovery income. Perhaps as a concession, the Commissioner is prepared to allow the cost of the upgrade to be  added to the existing adjusted tax value and the depreciation loss to continue despite disposal. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 9, May 1993 at 10 ▪ a patent application that concludes because the patent is granted ▪ geothermal wells treated as being no longer available for use at the end of their “proving” period. However, it is calculated if a disused well is brought back into production, or ▪ property damaged by the Canterbury or Hurunui/Kaikōura earthquakes for which a taxpayer receives insurance or compensation and the person chooses to defer recognition of the depreciation recovery income to a later year under s EZ 23B or EZ 23BC (see further under “Depreciable property affected by Canterbury earthquakes” and “Depreciable property affected by Hurunui/Kaikōura earthquakes”). Consideration As a general rule, the consideration taken into account when calculating depreciation recovery income is the consideration derived from the disposal (excluding GST), less any costs of disposal that are not otherwise allowed as a deduction. GST is excluded when determining the costs of disposal if the person has made an input tax credit claim in a GST return in relation to the cost. If the consideration derived is not the market value for the property, the consideration becomes that market value (excluding GST). Consideration is to be apportioned when depreciable property is disposed of along with other property, with the consideration derived for the depreciable property deemed to be its market value (excluding GST). Specific provisions apply to: ▪ the disposal of depreciable property subject to subpart FC (see ¶13-600)  ▪ the disposal of depreciable property pursuant to a settlement of relationship property (see ¶13-580) ▪ certain depreciation recovery income events (see below). Depreciation recovery income events A number of specific events are treated as if they were disposals of depreciable property and therefore trigger a depreciation recovery income calculation. Change of use The change of use of an asset, such as when the asset starts to be used entirely for a private purpose, is treated as being equivalent to a disposal of that asset. Similarly, the relocation of depreciable property so that no deduction is allowed for an amount of depreciation loss is deemed to be a disposal. In both cases, the property’s market value, excluding GST, is taken as the consideration derived. A deemed disposal also occurs when there is a change in the use of an item that is commercial fit-out (see ¶13-410), or where there is a change in use for a building that contains commercial fit-out. Fit-out relating to commercial property may be depreciated, while fit-out relating to residential property is generally not depreciable. If a building has both commercial and residential use, the main use of the building must be determined. If the main use of the building is for commercial purposes, then fit-out may be depreciable (see ¶13410). A deemed disposal will occur where the use of the fit-out or the building changes from commercial to residential. Conversely, there is a deemed acquisition for market value when the use of a building changes from residential to commercial. The deemed disposal or acquisition takes place on the first day of the following income year. Inland Revenue has confirmed in QB 19/02 “Depreciation — change of use event” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 153), that there is a deemed disposal for change of use where a business becomes a charity and begins to derive exempt income, even though assets are still being applied in the business in the  same way. This is because the property is no longer used in a business or for the purpose of deriving assessable income, but instead is used for the purpose of deriving exempt income. This is deemed to be a disposal of the depreciable property for market value. A consequence of this conclusion is that the business may have a depreciation gain (or loss) on this disposal. With effect from 28 June 2018, a provision (s EE 47(2B)) provides that the change of use (and therefore the depreciation income or loss) arises immediately before the entity’s income becomes exempt. Loss or theft The loss or theft of depreciable property that is not recovered in the year of loss is treated as if it was a disposal of the property. The consideration derived is any insurance recovery or other compensation, excluding GST received by the taxpayer. If the asset is uninsured, it is treated as disposed of for no consideration. A person can write off a lost or stolen asset if it is uninsured, or the insurance proceeds received are less than the adjusted tax value. If a lost or stolen asset that is insured is subsequently recovered, and ownership has passed to the insurer, the person may reacquire it for a cost and use it again in the person’s business. In this case the property is depreciated in the usual way from a base value equal to its cost. If a lost or stolen asset is subsequently recovered, is still owned by the person and will be used again or be available for use by the person in the person’s business, the following applies: ▪ the person is treated as having acquired the asset, on the date of recovery, for its adjusted tax value at the start of the income year in which it was lost or stolen ▪ the person is treated as deriving depreciation recovery income equal to the amount previously written off for the lost or stolen asset. The income year in which the depreciation recovery income is derived is:  ▪ if the person chooses, the income year in which the asset is lost or stolen, or ▪ in any other case, the income year in which the item is recovered. Irreparable damage Irreparable damage to depreciable property (other than buildings and grandparented structures) is treated as being a disposal of that property. From 4 September 2010, a deemed disposal also occurs when buildings and grandparented structures are damaged. Specifically, the disposal takes place when damage occurs to a building or grandparented structure, or in the neighbourhood of the building or grandparented structure, that causes the item to be: ▪ useless for the purpose of deriving assessable income, and ▪ demolished or abandoned for later demolition. The second item above is intended to cater for buildings that are affected by natural events such as earthquakes, but that are not irreparably damaged by the natural event. Where damage to the neighbouring area requires the building to be demolished, a deemed disposal will arise even if the building itself is not irreparably damaged. The provision is generic and is not restricted to assets affected by the Canterbury earthquakes (see s EE 47(4)). ▸Note: The former definition of “building” previously excluded certain structures acquired before 30 July 2009, eg barns, carparks, powder drying buildings, which were collectively defined as grandparented structures (see ¶13-410). To fall within s EE 47(4), therefore, grandparented structures had to be specifically referred to in addition to buildings. However, with the repeal of the definition of “building” from 1 April 2020, these structures are no longer excluded from the general meaning of building and the definition of “grandparented structure” has been repealed from that date. The wording of s EE 47(4), however, has not yet been amended to take account of this change.  The consideration deemed to be derived is the total of the amount of the insurance, indemnity or compensation received for the item (excluding the amount of any GST if the amount received is deemed to be consideration for the supply of goods and services by a registered person under s 5(13) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985) and any proceeds received upon disposal (for example, any scrap value). Repossession Repossession of depreciable property pursuant to a reservation of title clause is treated as a disposal occurring on the date of repossession. The consideration derived is cost, less the net amount paid, excluding GST and any refund made by the seller. See further at ¶13-014. Unused geothermal wells brought into use The bringing into use of a previously unused geothermal well after a depreciation loss was claimed will be treated as a disposal. The consideration derived from the event is the amount of the deduction for the depreciation loss allowed. Acquisition under statutory authority The acquisition of depreciable property pursuant to some statutory authority is treated as a disposal. The compensation received, less any costs, is deducted from the property’s adjusted tax value. If that produces a negative amount, depreciation recovery income comprises that negative amount. End or assignment of lease A lessee who is treated as owning the improvements added to leased premises (see ¶13-014) is treated as having made a disposal of those improvements when the lease ends or is assigned. Any compensation received is deducted from adjusted tax value, and depreciation recovery income arises to the extent that it produces a negative amount. Intangible property rights ceased  A disposal also occurs in relation to intangible property, when it is no longer possible to exercise the rights that constitute the property. If an insurance recovery or compensation is received, depreciation recovery income arises to the extent that its deduction from adjusted tax value produces a negative amount. Permanent removal from New Zealand The final event that is treated as a disposal is the permanent removal from New Zealand of an asset that qualified for a first year depreciation allowance under the Income Tax Act 1976. Death Specific provisions apply upon a person’s death or when a distribution is made by an executor or trustee. See ¶13-600. Calculation of depreciation recovery income Under s EE 48(1), depreciation recovery income arises if the consideration received or attributed upon the disposal of an item of depreciable property or the occurrence of an event is more than its adjusted tax value. The amount of the depreciation recovery income is the lesser of: ▪ the excess of consideration over the adjusted tax value on the date of the disposal or the occurrence of the event, or ▪ the total of all depreciation loss for the property previously allowed as a deduction and the amount of any capital contribution received on or after 20 May 2010 which is subject to s DB 64. See ¶13-164. In the event that a loss arises upon disposal, because the consideration is less than the adjusted tax value, a depreciation loss arises for the amount of that shortfall. That proposition is subject to the specific rules for buildings, noted at ¶13-410, and for petroleum assets, noted at ¶13-550. Before 4 September 2010, depreciation recovery income arose in the income year in which the disposal or event took place. Since 4 September 2010, depreciation recovery income is deemed to be  derived in the earliest income year in which the related consideration can be reasonably estimated. This allows taxpayers waiting for insurance or other compensation in relation to damaged property to defer recognition of depreciation recovery income until the amount of the compensation can be reasonably estimated. Inland Revenue has confirmed that this change is generic and is not limited to property affected by the Christchurch earthquakes (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 66). Insurance or compensation for repairable assets When a taxpayer receives an amount of insurance or compensation for a depreciable asset (other than lost, stolen or irreparably damaged items), an adjustment is required to the asset’s adjusted tax value. The amount of the insurance or compensation (less the cost of any repairs to the asset) must be deducted from the asset’s adjusted tax value. If the asset’s adjusted tax value becomes a negative amount in an income year, then the negative amount is deemed to be depreciation recovery income for the taxpayer in that income year (s EE 52). If the compensation is derived after the damaged property is disposed of, the compensation is treated as being derived immediately before the disposal. A cap to the amount of depreciation recovery income under s EE 52 applies to repairable assets affected by the Canterbury earthquakes (see below). Depreciable property affected by Canterbury earthquakes A number of special rules apply in relation to depreciable property affected by the Canterbury earthquakes. These are discussed below. Deferral of depreciation recovery income Taxpayers may choose to defer the recognition of depreciation recovery income (suspended recovery income) in relation to depreciable property (other than depreciable intangible property) affected by the Canterbury earthquakes under s EZ 23B where the taxpayer receives an amount of insurance or compensation and plans to acquire replacement property. The suspended recovery  income then reduces the amount of expenditure incurred on a replacement item for the purposes of determining the replacement item’s cost or value. Specifically, s EZ 23B applies for an income year (current year) that is before the 2024–25 income year where the taxpayer: ▪ receives earthquake compensation in or before the current year for: □ depreciable property (other than buildings and grandparented structures) that is irreparably damaged, or □ buildings or grandparented structures that are rendered useless for deriving income and demolished or abandoned for later demolition due to damage to the buildings or grandparented structures or the neighbouring areas, or □ property that has been assessed as uneconomic to repair and to which s EZ 23C or EZ 70 applies (see below), and ▪ would otherwise have depreciation recovery income in or before the current year in the absence of s EZ 23B, and ▪ plans to acquire depreciable property (replacement property) in the current year that meets certain requirements (see below), and ▪ notifies the Commissioner (see below). The taxpayer must separate the affected depreciable assets into four classes: buildings/grandparented structures not depreciated using the pool method, fit-out not depreciated using the pool method, poolmethod property and other property. Depreciation recovery income must be calculated for each class, and s EZ 23B utilised on a classby-class basis. Replacement assets must be new or secondhand assets belonging to the same class. In the event that the taxpayer later chooses not to purchase replacement assets, or goes into liquidation or becomes bankrupt,  then depreciation recovery income still arises. The replacement property must: ▪ be included in the same class of property if the property is a building, grandparented structure or commercial fit-out not depreciated using the pool method, and ▪ must be located in greater Christchurch (as defined in s 4 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011 (which definition continues to apply as it did immediately before its repeal by the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016)) if the property is a building, grandparented structure or commercial fit-out. A taxpayer wishing to utilise s EZ 23B must notify the Commissioner by the later of 31 January 2012 and the due date for the relevant income tax return for the earliest income year in which the insurance or compensation can be reasonably estimated. Subsequent annual notifications are also required for each income year for which the taxpayer chooses to suspend depreciation recovery income. These are due on the same date as that for filing the annual return. If all of the above requirements are met, then the taxpayer may defer recognition of depreciation recovery income. Example 1: Tommy’s Toys Ltd purchased a building in the 2000 income year from which to operate its business at a cost of $800,000. By the 2011 income year, the building was depreciated down to $500,000. As a result of damage caused by the Christchurch earthquake Tommy’s Toys Ltd received an insurance payout of $1,000,000. Normally, depreciation recovery income of $300,000 would arise. However, Tommy’s Toys Ltd can elect to utilise s EZ 23B and effectively treat the $300,000 as suspended recovery income. The company later purchases another building costing $1,000,000 from which it operates its business. The cost of the building is reduced by $300,000. Buildings generally have a 0% depreciation rate from 1 April 2011. However, if Tommy’s Toys Ltd subsequently sells the building for more than its adjusted tax value, there will be $300,000 worth of depreciation recovery income.  QWBA on depreciation roll-over relief for Canterbury  On 23 May 2014, Inland Revenue released Question We’ve Been Asked QB 14/04: “Income tax — Depreciation roll-over relief for Canterbury” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 6, July 2014, at 44). The item outlines the depreciation roll-over relief provisions and gives a step-by-step approach, aided by examples, to demonstrate how the formula in s EZ 23B(4) works. The examples consider three different scenarios: the first is when the cost of the replacement property exceeds the cost of the affected property, the second is when the cost of the replacement property is less than the cost of the affected property, and the third is when multiple items of replacement property are acquired. The item also sets out the Commissioner’s operational approach when taxpayers have incorrectly applied the formula because of the interpretive uncertainty or because of uncertainty clarified by the Taxation (Annual Rates, Foreign Superannuation, and Remedial Matters) Act 2014. Where this results in an overpayment of tax, taxpayers can request an amendment of their assessment and the Commissioner will apply SPS 07/03 on a case by case basis to determine whether to amend assessments. Where there is an underpayment of tax, the Commissioner will not actively apply her resources to seek to amend assessments. However, this approach applies only to the application of the formula in returns filed before the publication of the Question We’ve Been Asked. Section EZ 23BB has also been introduced as a companion provision to s EZ 23B. It allows the recognition of income arising from compensation for depreciable property to be deferred if the owner notifies the Commissioner that the owner intends to acquire an interest in a company that will acquire replacement property. The section applies from 4 September 2010 and, like s EZ 23B, provides relief to the end of the 2023–24 income year. Because some taxpayers who intend to acquire the replacement property via a company may have already relied on s EZ 23B for rollover relief before the introduction of s EZ 23BB, a transitional measure is included to enable taxpayers who have relied on s EZ 23B to utilise s EZ 23BB going forward. Assets that are uneconomic to repair  A deemed disposal and reacquisition occurs when certain depreciable assets are assessed as uneconomic to repair due to damage caused by a Canterbury earthquake (s EZ 70 and former s EZ 23C). In particular, a deemed disposal and reacquisition occurs if all of following circumstances apply: ▪ the asset is damaged by a Canterbury earthquake (as defined in s 4 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011), and ▪ the taxpayer is entitled to insurance or compensation for the damage to the property, and ▪ the payer of the insurance or compensation assesses that the asset is uneconomic to repair, and ▪ the damage is not: □ irreparable damage to property that is not a building or grandparented structure, or □ damage to a building or grandparented structure, or the neighbourhood, that causes the building or grandparented structure to be useless for deriving assessable income and demolished or abandoned for later demolition. The deemed disposal takes place for the amount of the insurance payment or compensation, while the reacquisition is deemed to take place for nil consideration. The deemed disposal and reacquisition takes place on the date of the Canterbury earthquake that caused the asset to become uneconomic to repair. Accordingly, depreciation recovery income may arise. Former s EZ 23C was effective from 4 September 2010 and applied for the 2010–11 to 2015–16 income years. Section EZ 70 applies for the 2016–17 to 2023–24 income years. Depreciation rollover relief under s EZ 23B can apply to assets which are assessed as being uneconomic to repair. In addition, a timing provision (s EZ 73 or former s EZ 23F) can also be utilised by  taxpayers to defer the recognition of depreciation recovery income (see below). Cap on depreciation recovery income where insurance received for repairable assets Where a taxpayer receives an amount of insurance or compensation for a repairable asset affected by the Canterbury earthquakes, the amount of depreciation recovery income is capped at the amount of depreciation deductions claimed in respect of the asset (s EZ 71 and former s EZ 23D). The provision does not apply to assets that are assessed as uneconomic to repair (see above). In the absence of the provision, taxpayers would potentially be subject to tax on a higher amount of depreciation recovery income under s EE 52. Former s EZ 23D was effective from 4 September 2010 and applied for the 2010–11 to 2015–16 income years. Section EZ 71 applies for the 2016–17 to 2023–24 income years. Example 2: Co A purchased a commercial property for $4m. Depreciation of $1m has been claimed by the company. The property was damaged by the Canterbury earthquakes. However, it is repairable and has not been assessed as uneconomic to repair. The company receives an insurance payout of $7m, and spends $1m on repairs. In normal circumstances, depreciation recovery income of $3m would arise for Co A under s EE 52 (being the excess of the amount of the insurance proceeds less the cost of the repairs over the property’s adjusted tax value). However, the amount of depreciation recovery income is capped at $1m under s EZ 23D or EZ 71, being the amount of depreciation deductions claimed.  Optional timing rule for assets that are uneconomic to repair or irreparably damaged An optional timing rule (s EZ 73 and former s EZ 23F) exists for assets for which the following applies: ▪ the asset is affected by a Canterbury Earthquake (as defined), and ▪ the asset is either subject to the former s EZ 23C or to s EZ 70, or is an irreparably damaged asset (apart from buildings and  grandparented structures), or is a building or grandparented structure that has been damaged and rendered useless for deriving assessable income and that is to be demolished or abandoned for later demolition, and ▪ the owner of the asset is entitled to an amount of insurance or compensation for the damage. If the above requirements are met, then related income and deductions is attributed to the earlier of: ▪ the 2023–24 income year, and ▪ the first income year in which the insurance receipt and the consideration received from the disposal is derived or able to be reasonably estimated, and the cost of disposing of the asset is incurred or able to be reasonably estimated. Once a taxpayer elects to use the provision for a particular asset, all assets that meet the requirements must be treated in the same way. Former s EZ 23F applied from 4 September 2010 for the 2010–11 to 2015–16 income years. Section EZ 73 applies for the 2016–17 to 2023–24 income years. Example 3: Pat owns equipment which was damaged in the Canterbury earthquakes and is not repairable. In the 2011–12 income year, Pat is able to reasonably estimate that he will receive $1,000 as scrap value for the equipment and that disposal costs will amount to $200. However, the amount of the insurance payment can only be reasonably estimated in the 2012–13 income year. Pat elects to utilise s EZ 23F. Therefore, the 2012–13 income year is the relevant year for the purposes of calculating depreciation recovery income and allowable deductions as this is the income year in which the disposal proceeds, cost of disposal and insurance receipt can all be reasonably estimated.  Optional timing rule for assets which are damaged but repairable A similar rule to the one above may be applied for assets that are damaged in the Canterbury earthquakes but can be repaired (s EZ  74 and former s EZ 23G). The provision may be chosen by taxpayers when all of the following requirements are met: ▪ the asset is affected by a Canterbury Earthquake (as defined), and ▪ the asset is not subject to former s EZ 23C or to s EZ 70 and is not an irreparably damaged asset (for assets that are not buildings or grandparented structures) and is not a building or grandparented structure that has been damaged and rendered useless for deriving assessable income and that is to be demolished or abandoned for later demolition, and ▪ the taxpayer is entitled to an amount of insurance or compensation for the damage. Where the above requirements are met, the recognition of income from the insurance receipt and the deduction for repairs costs is attributed to the earlier of: ▪ the 2023–24 income year, and ▪ the first income year in which the repair cost is incurred or is able to be reasonably estimated and the insurance receipt is derived or able to be reasonably estimated. Once the provision is chosen, it must be applied to all assets which qualify. Former s EZ 23G applied from 4 September 2010 for the 2010–11 to 2015–16 income years. Section EZ 74 applies for the 2016–17 to 2023–24 income years. ▸Note: The former definition of “building” previously excluded certain structures acquired before 30 July 2009, eg barns, carparks, powder drying buildings, which were collectively defined as grandparented structures (see ¶13-410). The above provisions dealing with the Canterbury earthquakes refer to both buildings and grandparented structures to ensure all such structures fall within the provisions. However, with the repeal of the definition of “building” from 1 April 2020, these structures are no longer excluded from the general  meaning of building and the definition of “grandparented structure” has also been repealed from that date. The wording of the provisions discussed above, however, has not yet been amended to take account of these changes. Depreciable property affected by the Hurunui/ Kaikōura earthquakes Provisions were introduced in 2017 to provide for depreciation recovery income roll-over relief for buildings and plant and equipment that were destroyed, or badly damaged, by a Hurunui/Kaikōura earthquake and are replaced. For the relief to be available for a damaged building, it must be in 1 of 2 zones and the replacement building must be in the same zone. One of the zones is the greater Wellington area and the other zone is the upper South Island. The details of the relief are modelled on those of the relief given to businesses affected by the Canterbury earthquakes, discussed above. The provisions apply for the 2015–16 to 2018–19 income years: ss EZ 23BC, EZ 78 and EZ 79. Transitional concession for mixed-use assets owned in companies A company that owned a mixed-use asset had a limited opportunity to transfer the asset out of the company to its shareholders without triggering depreciation recovery income at the time of transfer. The following criteria had to first be satisfied: ▪ the company had to own the mixed-use asset on 31 March 2013, and ▪ the asset had to be transferred to one or more shareholders (in proportion) before the end of the company’s 2013–14 income year. If the above criteria were satisfied, the asset was treated as having been disposed of for its adjusted tax value on the date of the transfer. Therefore, no depreciation recovery income arose for the company.  However, depreciation recovery income will be crystallised when the shareholder(s) subsequently disposes of the mixed-use asset for more than its adjusted tax value. This is achieved by treating the shareholder(s) as having acquired the asset on the date it was originally acquired by the company, paying the associated purchase price, and having claimed the depreciation deductions claimed by the company (using the same depreciation method). If the mixed-use asset is transferred to more than one shareholder then each shareholder’s cost and depreciation loss is based on the proportion of their voting interests in the company. Note that when originally enacted the transitional provision provided that no depreciation recovery would be triggered. This was retrospectively corrected by legislative amendment. However, the amended provision will not trigger depreciation recovery for an asset when a shareholder who acquired the asset disposed of it before 22 November 2013, being the date of introduction of the amending legislation. Property partly used for business Provision is made in s EE 49 for the calculation of depreciation recovery income in relation to a motor vehicle or other asset which has been only partly used for the purpose of deriving assessable income. If the consideration derived upon disposal does not exceed the cost of the asset, the depreciation recovery income is calculated according to the formula: (all deductions ÷ (base value − adjusted tax value)) × amount of depreciation recovery income where: all deductions is the total of prior deductions allowed for depreciation loss for the asset base value is the depreciable cost of the asset adjusted tax value is the adjusted tax value of the asset on the day of disposal, and  amount of depreciation recovery income is the depreciation recovery income for the asset (being the lesser of the excess of consideration derived over adjusted tax value or the aggregate of prior deductions for depreciation loss). Depreciation deductions for assets which are subject to the mixeduse rules (see ¶10-035) are calculated under those rules; however, those rules do not affect the application of s EE 49 on disposal of the asset. With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, there is no depreciation recovery income for a motor vehicle that is dealt with under the motor vehicle expenditure rules in subpart DE if the taxpayer has elected to use the kilometre rate method in s DE 12. Law: IT07 ss CG 1, DZ 21, EE 44–EE 52, EZ 23B–EZ 23G, EZ 70– EZ 74  SPECIFIC ASSETS AND EVENTS ¶13-380 Depreciation — aircraft The depreciation rules contain various specific rates which relate only to aircraft. An aircraft that is: ▪ self-propelled ▪ fixed wing ▪ not an international craft ▪ not used for top-dressing or spraying, and ▪ not a helicopter  has an economic rate of 10% diminishing value or 7% straight-line. The rate is set by legislation, rather than by Commissioner’s determination. The 20% uplift factor can be applied to these aircraft if purchased on or before 20 May 2010. International aircraft are also depreciated at a rate set by legislation, rather than by the Commissioner’s determination. The annual rate for international aircraft is specified as being 10% straight-line or 15% diminishing value. There is no uplift factor applied to this rate. Other aircraft will be depreciated at economic rates determined by the Commissioner. Aircraft engine overhaul deductions Changes have been made relating to the timing of aircraft engine overhaul deductions. With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, the engine overhaul component is no longer treated as part of the aircraft as a whole for depreciation purposes. The cost of the aircraft engine overhaul component and subsequent overhaul of that component is an allowable deduction, allocated to an income year on a time-in-service basis. A transitional deduction was provided for in relation to an aircraft owned at the end of the 2016–17 income year and that continued to be used in the aircraft operator’s business in the 2017–18 income year. The provision allowed a deduction for the proportion of the adjusted tax value that related to the engine overhaul component instead of continuing to depreciate that amount as part of the aircraft. The adjusted tax value of the aircraft as a whole was reduced by an amount equal to the transitional deduction allowed. See further at ¶10-127. Law: IT07 ss DZ 22, EE 29(2), EE 31(2)(c), EZ 23BA  ¶13-390 Amalgamations and depreciation Acquisition not part of a resident’s restricted amalgamation  Special rules apply to determine the cost base and the rate of depreciation to be applied by an amalgamated company that acquires property under an amalgamation that is not a resident’s restricted amalgamation and where the amalgamating company is associated with the amalgamated company. In these circumstances the depreciable cost for the amalgamated company is usually the lesser of: ▪ the market value of the property at the time of acquisition by the amalgamated company, or ▪ the cost price of the property in the hands of the amalgamating company. In the case of an asset (other than a building or petroleum-related depreciable property) that was not acquired to produce assessable income, but which is subsequently so applied, the depreciable cost for the amalgamated company is the lesser of: ▪ the market value at the time of change of use by the amalgamating company, or ▪ the market value when the amalgamating company first committed the asset to business use. There is scope for the Commissioner to accept the use of cost by the amalgamated company as the depreciable cost if the property is not depreciable intangible property and the Commissioner accepts that it is appropriate to use cost. In exercising his discretion to accept cost, the Commissioner will consider similar factors to those set out in standard practice statement SPS 07/05, “Transfer of depreciable property between associated persons — section EE 33 of the Income Tax Act 2004”. See ¶13-400. Also, if the amalgamating company derives assessable income from the transfer of the property to the amalgamated company (other than as depreciation recovery income), the amalgamated company may use cost as the depreciable cost.  The rate of depreciation to be applied by the amalgamated company cannot exceed the rate applied by the amalgamating company, if the amalgamated company adopts the same depreciation method as the amalgamating company. If a different method is adopted, the rate applied by the amalgamated company cannot exceed a rate equivalent to the one applied by the amalgamating company upon application of the rates of equivalence specified in sch 10. Resident’s restricted amalgamation A different outcome applies where depreciable property becomes vested in another company under a resident’s restricted amalgamation. When New Zealand resident companies amalgamate, they are treated as one company and all assets, liabilities, property, rights, powers and privileges of the amalgamating companies are vested in the new amalgamated company. The Commissioner accepts that there is no depreciation recovery income when assets are transferred on a resident’s restricted amalgamation. See further at ¶20-106. Law: IT07 s EE 41  ¶13-400 Restriction on depreciation deduction for associated person transfers The purchaser of an asset from an associated person may be restricted to the deduction for depreciation losses that the vendor would have been allowed. This is because the depreciable cost for the purchaser may be the cost of the asset for the vendor and not the purchaser’s actual cost. In addition, the purchaser may be unable to adopt a depreciation rate exceeding the rate applied by the vendor. The restriction potentially applies to a purchaser who acquires an item of depreciable property from an associated person. The restriction extends to an asset that the vendor elected is not to be treated as depreciable property. The restriction does not apply if:  ▪ the property is not depreciable intangible property and the Commissioner considers that it is appropriate that the purchaser should be able to use the purchaser’s cost as the depreciable cost. The Commissioner’s position is that he must give written approval to any use of the purchaser’s cost ▪ the vendor is assessable upon sale of the asset other than through the recognition of depreciation recovery income, or ▪ the purchaser acquires the property on a settlement of relationship property to which s FB 21 applies. Commissioner’s permission to use purchaser’s cost The Commissioner has the power to decide whether the use of the purchaser’s cost is appropriate. A refusal by the Commissioner to allow depreciation to be calculated on the basis of the purchaser’s cost was overruled in C of IR v Lys (1988) 10 NZTC 5,107. The case concerned the sale of farming assets at fair market value to a family trust for estate planning purposes. The Commissioner acknowledged that, generally, the restriction to the vendor’s cost is not enforced in respect of arm’s length transactions. In light of that practice, the High Court proceeded to enquire whether the present transfer had occurred on an arm’s length basis. The Court thought that the sale had been in accordance with normal commercial and conveyancing practices, since there had not been, for example, any retention of ownership by the vendor. The sale had been arm’s length, so that the purchaser could claim depreciation on the basis of its cost. Standard practice statement SPS 07/05, “Transfer of depreciable property between associated persons — section EE 33 of the Income Tax Act 2004”, (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 9, October 2007 at 16) sets out the factors which the Commissioner will consider when deciding whether to allow a purchaser acquiring an asset from an associated person to depreciate the asset based on the purchaser’s cost.  In deciding whether to exercise discretion the Commissioner will consider all relevant factors in the context in which the transfer has taken place, including a full analysis of the following factors: ▪ whether the transfer is genuine ▪ whether the transfer is made at no more than market value ▪ whether there is a permanent transfer of legal ownership of the property ▪ whether the associated vendor (or its controllers) continues to retain virtual ownership of, or a beneficial interest in, the transferred property through: □ power over or control of the associated purchaser □ a leaseback agreement, or □ continued actual use of the property for income-producing purposes, and ▪ the commercial or non-tax reasons for transfer of the asset. For the purposes of the test, the concept of “control” is based on accounting principles by reference, in the most part, to NZIAS. The test will look at the aspects of the vendor’s power to control the purchaser, and the extent to which the vendor continues to have an economic interest in the property. Effect of restriction Depreciable cost for the purchaser becomes the lesser of: ▪ the price paid by the purchaser, or ▪ the price originally paid by the vendor for the asset (or, if applicable, the market value of the asset at the time the associated person first committed it to business use).  If the asset purchased was first used by the vendor for a private purpose, the purchaser’s depreciable cost is the lesser of the purchaser’s cost or the vendor’s cost. The restriction in the second place operates in relation to the rate of depreciation that the purchaser may apply. If the purchaser adopts the same method as the vendor, the purchaser’s rate cannot exceed the rate applied by the vendor. If a different depreciation method is adopted, the purchaser’s rate must not exceed a rate equivalent to that applied by the vendor as determined under the rates of equivalence set out in sch 10. If the property in question is fixed life intangible property, the rate applicable under that concept is the purchaser’s rate. The above restrictions do not apply when the disposal is a bequest of property and the disposal takes place at market value under subpart FC of the Income Tax Act 2007 (see ¶13-600). Law: IT07 s EE 40  ¶13-410 Buildings and depreciation Before the 2011–12 income year, depreciation was generally allowed on all buildings at their economic rate, which was determined by the date of acquisition. From the 2011–12 income year, all buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more had an annual depreciation rate of 0%. Other buildings remained depreciable. However, as part of the Coalition Government’s package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus, it was announced on 17 March 2020 that depreciation would be re-introduced for commercial and industrial buildings from the 2020–21 income year. The depreciation deductions would be available to all sectors and would apply to both new and existing buildings on a permanent basis. Building owners would be able to adjust provisional tax payments immediately in anticipation of the additional deductions that would become available. The necessary legislative changes were enacted under urgency on 25 March 2020.  Thus, with effect from 1 April 2020, for the 2020–21 and later income years, only residential buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have an annual depreciation rate of 0%. Nonresidential buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have a depreciation rate of 2% diminishing value or 1.5% straightline. A “non-residential building” is any building that is not a “residential building”. A “residential building” is defined as a dwelling, and includes a building intended to ordinarily provide accommodation for periods of less than 28 days at a time, if the building, together with other buildings on the same land, has less than 4 units for separate accommodation. A “dwelling” is defined as any place used predominantly as a place of residence or abode, but excludes commercial dwellings such as hotels, motels, hospitals, rest homes, serviced apartments, etc. Thus, the definition encompasses houses and apartments that are owner-occupied or subject to residential tenancies. The additional inclusion in the “residential building” definition of certain buildings providing short-stay accommodation is to ensure such buildings (eg a bach an owner uses but also rents out on a short-term basis, and buildings used exclusively for short-term accommodation provided by owners such as some Airbnb properties) are within the definition. They may already fall within the definition of “dwelling”, but their specific inclusion within the “residential building” definition makes it clear they remain depreciable at the 0% rate. The requirement that there be less than 4 units ensures larger commercial operations are excluded from being residential buildings. For buildings other than those with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more, the annual rate will usually be the building’s economic rate. Although residential buildings (before 1 April 2020, buildings) with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have a 0% annual rate, they are still considered depreciable property so that a disposal may give rise to depreciation recovery income.  To commence (or re-commence) depreciation deductions, the cost or adjusted tax value of the non-residential building must be ascertained. The adjusted tax value (ATV) at the beginning of the 2020–21 income year for non-residential buildings that were owned in the 2010–11 income year is: ▪ the ATV at the end of the 2010–11 income year reduced by the amount of any deductions taken under former s DB 65 (see below), plus ▪ non-deductible capital expenditure incurred on the building from the end of the 2010–11 income year to the start of the 2020–21 income year. Where non-residential buildings were acquired after the end of the 2010–11 income year, the opening tax value is the cost plus nondeductible capital improvements made to the building from the time of acquisition up until the beginning of the 2020–21 income year. For taxpayers who wish to adopt the straight-line method, the cost for depreciation purposes is the opening adjusted tax value if this is different to the original cost. Land and apportionment Land is not depreciable property and therefore does not attract a depreciation loss that may be allowed as a deduction. This exclusion may perhaps be taken to reflect the notion that depreciation is a deduction in recognition of an asset’s contribution to the earning of income and the eventual cost of its replacement. By its nature, land cannot be consumed and therefore has no replacement cost. In Case G11 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,035, it was said that land, as such, does not depreciate. On the other hand, buildings, fixtures and improvements to land (as listed in sch 13 — see ¶13-500) are depreciable property if they might reasonably be expected to decline in value while used or available for use in deriving assessable income, or in carrying on a business for the purposes of deriving assessable income.  To give effect to the exclusion for land, it is necessary for depreciation purposes to make some apportionment between the cost of the land and any buildings or other improvements situated on the land. An acceptable method of apportionment is to take the most recent council rating valuation for the property and apply the following formula: (value of improvements (buildings) ÷ capital value (land and buildings)) × purchase price = cost of buildings Example 1: Lotta paid $490,000 for a rental property. The chattels included in the purchase are carpets, curtains, light fittings, stove and a dishwasher. The rating valuation gives the following figures: $ Value of land  350,000  Value of improvements  100,000  Total capital value  450,000  The improvements include the house, driveway and fences but not the chattels. The steps followed by Lotta to determine the opening tax values of the house and chattels are the following: 1. Lotta considers the age and condition of the chattels and reviews the prices for similar items in classified advertisements. Lotta determines to adopt market values of $1,900 for carpets, $1,500 for curtains, $600 for light fittings, $750 for the stove and $800 for the dishwasher. This gives a total cost of $5,550. 2. The purchase price for the land and house is therefore: $490,000 − $5,550 = $484,450. 3. The cost of the house is calculated as follows: $484,450 × $100,000  = $107,656.  $450,000 This method uses the figures from the registered valuation or rating valuation to establish the proportions of the land and building costs in the total purchase price. The depreciation loss is not calculated on the building cost as shown in the valuation, being $100,000 in this case.  The exclusion for land is subject to one modification. Improvements that are made to the land may give rise to a depreciation loss that is allowed as a deduction. See ¶13-500. Commercial fit-out Note that before the 2020–21 income year, to clarify the position that the fit-out of commercial buildings was not subject to the statutory 0% annual depreciation rate that applied to buildings from the 2011– 12 income year, the former definition of “building” excluded commercial fit-outs. However, with the restriction of the 0% rate to residential buildings from the 2020–21 income year, the building definition and its exclusion for commercial fit-outs was no longer necessary and it was repealed. There are two parts to the definition of “commercial fit-out”. Firstly, “commercial fit-out” means plant and other items that are attached to commercial buildings, but that are not used inside a dwelling within the commercial building or do not form part of a dwelling inside a commercial building. Secondly, the definition excludes items that are holding up the building (structural) or that are used to weather-proof the building (with the consequence that these items will not be depreciable). The first part of the definition addresses the issue where an item is used for both a commercial building and a dwelling within the commercial building. (Note that “commercial building” and “dwelling” are defined terms.) In this case the dominant purpose of the building must be determined. Determining whether the dominant purpose is for residential or commercial use will depend upon the nature of the building. One method to determine dominant purpose may be to compare the floor area of the residential part or the commercial part with the total floor area of the building (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 67). Example 2:  A building is mainly commercial but contains a small residential unit on the top floor. The items of fit-out which are shared between the commercial and residential areas (for example, items of fit-out in the lobby) can be depreciated. However, items of fitout which are specifically part of the residential unit will not be depreciable.  Concessionary rule When the statutory 0% rate was introduced for buildings with an estimated useful life of more than 50 years from the 2011–12 income year, a concessionary rule was introduced for commercial building owners who had not previously separated out items of fit-out from the building itself. For the 2011–12 to 2019–20 income years, s DB 65 allowed a deduction of 2% of the adjusted tax value of the building (after certain adjustments) on a straight-line basis, calculated in accordance with the following formula: starting pool × 0.02 × (whole months / 12) “Starting pool” was, in turn, calculated as follows: (0.15 × building atv) − fit-out atv The starting pool was essentially 15% of the building’s adjusted tax value for the 2010–11 income year less the adjusted tax value of any fit-out for the 2010–11 income year that related to the building, was acquired subsequent to the purchase of the building, and had been separately identified and depreciated. “Whole months” was the number of months for which the property was used or available for use in deriving assessable income or carrying on a business. The deduction applied for the 2011–12 to 2019–20 income years, until the building was disposed of. Example 3: Mariposa Ltd purchased a commercial building for $1,000,000 in April 2007. At the time of purchase Mariposa Ltd did not separately identify and depreciate items of commercial fit-out. The building has been depreciated at 2% SL. During April 2008, the company installed an air-conditioning system at a cost of $30,000. The air-conditioning system was recorded as a separate asset in the books  and depreciated at 24% SL. As at 31 March 2011, the adjusted tax value of the building was $920,000 and $8,400 for the air-conditioning system. Pursuant to s DB 65 Mariposa Ltd could claim additional depreciation in relation to the building. The amount of the deduction for the 2011–12 income year was calculated as follows: starting pool × 0.02 × (whole months / 12) “starting pool” was calculated as 15% of the building’s adjusted tax value at the end of the 2010–11 income year less the adjusted tax value of the air-conditioning system at the end of the 2010–11 income year: “whole months” in this case was 12 as the building had been applied towards the company’s business for the whole of the 2011–12 income year. (15% × $920,000) − $8,400 = $129,600 The depreciation deduction was therefore: $129,600 × 0.02 (12 / 12) = $2,592.  In “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 13/01: “Depreciation of commercial fit-out”, the Commissioner was specifically asked whether a taxpayer can re-characterise a part of a commercial building into components of commercial fit-out to claim depreciation on those items when they had not been identified as separate depreciable property at the time the taxpayer acquired the property. The Commissioner’s view is that where commercial fit-out was acquired at the same time as the building and depreciated as part of the building, there is no ability to later re-characterise that commercial fit-out as separate from the building. Section DB 65 set out the only way in which such items could continue to be depreciated when buildings were depreciated at 0%. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 5, June 2013 at 24. Commissioner’s policy statement on buildings In interpretation statement IS 10/02, “Meaning of ‘building’ in the depreciation provisions”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 5, June 2010 at 24, Inland Revenue considers that for the purposes of the depreciation provisions, the ordinary or conventional meaning of “building” should be used. This was accepted by the High Court in Mercury NZ Ltd v C of IR (2019) 29 NZTC ¶24-014. Following the ordinary or conventional meaning, a building:  ▪ is a structure of considerable size ▪ is permanent (intended to last and to remain in one location, for a long period of time) ▪ is normally fixed to the land (but may not be legally part of the land) on which it stands ▪ is sheltered by a roof and walls ▪ can function as a separate structure (but may not necessarily be physically separate). Certain items discussed in this interpretation statement that were not previously considered to be buildings were then considered by Inland Revenue to be buildings rather than structures. However, special rules were applied to grandparent certain assets that were purchased, or for which a binding contract was entered into, on or before 30 July 2009 (the date the statement first applied). Such items were excluded from the former definition of “building”. If these grandparented structures were sold after 30 July 2009, they lost their status as a grandparented structure and were required to be treated as a building by the new owner. However, these special rules only applied to the end of the 2019–20 income year. With effect from the 2020–21 income year, the provisions relating to grandparented structures have been repealed as part of the changes made to reinstate depreciation on non-residential buildings. Grandparented structures were items that were acquired or for which a binding contract was entered into on or before 30 July 2009 and that were one of the following: ▪ barns, including barns (drying) ▪ carparks (buildings) ▪ chemical works ▪ fertiliser works  ▪ powder drying buildings ▪ site huts. The Commissioner issued Determination DEP 79: “Remedial matters relating to the depreciation of buildings” and Determination DEP 81 “Fertiliser storage facilities and remedial matters relating to the depreciation of buildings and grandparented structures” which applied for the 2012 and subsequent income years. These determinations set out the relevant depreciation rates for the items listed above. Guidance on particular buildings The Commissioner released QB 17/01, “Depreciation treatment for ‘Buildings with prefabricated stressed-skin insulation panels’” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 122). The item provides that buildings will fall within the asset class “Buildings with prefabricated stressed-skin insulation panels” where: ▪ The structural framework of the building is of a material other than sandwich panels and the building can be categorised as a “shade-roof structure”. ▪ The structural framework of the building is of a material other than sandwich panels and no less than 75% of the exterior cladding of the building is predominantly made using sandwich panels. In calculating this 75% threshold: □ The windows and doors of a building are ignored and treated as being constructed of the same material as that which surrounds them. □ Unless the roof of a building is constructed solely or partly using sandwich panels, the roof is ignored and the calculation focuses only on the exterior cladding. Where the roof is constructed solely or partly using sandwich panels, the calculation should focus on the square metre area of  the exterior cladding of the entire building (that is, the square metre area of both the side walls and roof). ▪ Sandwich panels form the core of the structural framework of the building; the building is constructed solely of interlocking sandwich panels without any other form of frame construction (steel, for instance). QB 17/01 replaced an earlier QWBA, QB 15/12, to provide greater clarity. Rental properties In the case of rental properties, the Commissioner has indicated that her preferred approach is to apply depreciation to the building as a whole (excluding such things normally regarded as chattels such as electric stoves and carpet). She has indicated that she does not accept the practice of “breaking up” rental properties into smaller components in order to claim higher depreciation deductions. Interpretation statement IS 10/01 – Residential rental properties In March 2010, the Commissioner issued interpretation statement IS 10/01, “Residential rental properties — depreciation of items of depreciable property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 4, May 2010 at 16). The interpretation statement states that an item of property must be classified as being either part of a building or a separate item of depreciable property. If an item is part of the building, it cannot be separately depreciated but it can be depreciated with the building (note that residential buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more are depreciated at a statutory rate of 0% from the 2011–12 income year: see above). The interpretation statement sets out three steps to be followed to determine whether a particular item is part of, or separate from, the building: ▪ Determine whether the item is in some way attached or connected to the building. If the item is not attached, it will not be considered as part of the building. An item is not considered  to be attached if it is only attached, plugged or wired into an electrical, gas or water outlet. ▪ Determine whether the item is an integral part of the residence such that the building would be incomplete or unable to function without the item. If the item is an integral part of the property, then the item will be part of the building. If not, then the next step must be considered. ▪ Determine whether the item is built-in or attached or connected such that it can be viewed as being part of the “fabric” of the building (the degree of attachment, whether the item can be removed easily, and the level of damage in doing so). If the item is part of the “fabric” of the building, then it will form part of the building. Plumbing and piping, electrical wiring, internal walls, internal and external doors, certain garage doors, fitted furniture (built into the wall), kitchen cupboards, bathroom fittings and furniture, linoleum, and wall and floor tiles are all considered to be part of the building and not separate items of depreciable property. The release of interpretation statement IS 10/01 was followed by the release of depreciation determination DEP 80: “Residential Rental Property Chattels” on 10 November 2011. The determination provides a list of residential rental property chattels that is consistent with the Commissioner’s stance outlined in IS 10/01. The determination applies from 1 April 2011. Healthy home standards In June 2020, Inland Revenue released a question we’ve been asked, QB 20/01, “Can owners of existing residential rental properties claim deductions for costs incurred to meet Healthy Homes standards?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 126). The Healthy Home standards are minimum requirements for residential rental homes for smoke alarms, heating, insulation, ventilation, draught-stopping, drainage and moisture ingress set by  regulation under the Residential Tenancies Act 1986. The regulations were introduced in two stages in 2016 (the 2016 regulations that applied from 1 July 2019) and 2019 (the 2019 regulations that apply progressively when there are changes in tenancies after 1 July 2021 and will be universally applicable from 1 July 2024). Determining whether costs incurred to meet these standards are deductible requires determining whether the expenditure is capital or revenue. This requires identifying the relevant asset and then the character of the expenditure is gauged against that asset. The item adopts the three-step test above from IS 10/01, “Residential rental properties — depreciation of items of depreciable property”, to identify what the relevant asset is. The item then adopts the approach in IS 12/03, “Income tax — deductibility of repairs and maintenance expenditure — general principles” (see ¶10-840), to determine the nature and extent of the work done to the asset. The tax treatment of expenditure incurred to meet each of the Healthy Homes standards is then considered. The QWBA confirms that costs of a revenue nature are generally deductible in the income year they are incurred. These may include the costs of: ▪ repairing items that would otherwise meet the standards if operational or in a reasonable condition ▪ minor additions or alterations not involving repairs that do not change the character of the building, such as: □ some costs of meeting the draught-stopping standards, such as blocking unused chimneys or fireplaces (if sufficiently attached to the building) □ making mechanical ventilation systems compliant, and □ some costs of meeting the moisture ingress and drainage standard in respect of ground moisture barriers  ▪ replacing items on a like-for-like basis in the future where they have previously been treated as part of the building, and ▪ record keeping and providing information in tenancy agreements. Capital costs will generally result in a deduction for a depreciation loss unless they are for something that is part of the residential rental building. The cost of items that are part of the building is added to the building’s cost and depreciated at the same rate as the building — generally 0%. Items that are likely to be part of the building include: ▪ smoke alarms ▪ insulation ▪ ducted or multi-unit heat pumps ▪ flued fires (wood or gas) ▪ new or replacement openable windows ▪ new exterior doors ▪ most extractor fans or rangehoods ▪ ground moisture barriers, and ▪ drainage systems for storm, surface and ground water and drainage of water from roofs. Capital costs for some items acquired that are not part of the building will be either ▪ depreciated over multiple income years using a rate set out in Depreciation Determination DEP 80: Residential rental property chattels for assets of that type, or  ▪ depreciated at a rate of 100% in the income year the expenditure is incurred if the item is a “low-value asset”. Items able to be depreciated include: ▪ electric panel heaters ▪ some heat pumps (eg, single-split type) ▪ through-window extractor fans ▪ window stays ▪ door openers and stops ▪ external door draught excluders, and ▪ some devices for blocking fireplaces or chimneys (if the devices are not sufficiently attached to the building). Disposal of buildings Depreciation recovery income will arise on the sale of a building if the sale price is more than the building’s adjusted tax value. The amount of depreciation recovery income is the lesser of the difference between the sale price and the adjusted tax value or the total depreciation deductions. Generally, no deduction is allowed if the sale proceeds are less than the adjusted tax value of the building, on the basis that the loss is a loss of a capital nature. There is an exception for a damaged building that can no longer be used to earn income. To qualify for the exception: ▪ the building or grandparented structure (see above) is rendered useless for the purpose of deriving assessable income, and has been demolished (or has been abandoned for later demolition) as a result of damage to the asset or to the neighbourhood of the asset, and ▪ the damage was caused by a natural event beyond the control of the taxpayer, an agent or an associated person, and  ▪ the damage was not caused by the action or failure to act by the taxpayer, an agent or associated person. Before 4 September 2010, a loss on disposal in relation to buildings was only permitted if the building suffered irreparable damage that occurred in the 2005–06 or later income years and was not caused as a result of an action or failure to act by the taxpayer, an agent or associate. The rules were extended as a result of the Christchurch earthquakes so that a loss on disposal can now be claimed where a building does not necessarily suffer irreparable damage but has to be demolished due to damage in the neighbouring areas. Law: IT07 ss EE 6, EE 7, EE 11(2), EE 48(3), YA 1, sch 13  ¶13-420 Company distributions of depreciable property A company may make a distribution of depreciable property to a shareholder under a transaction that is classified as dividends. In that event: ▪ the company is treated as having disposed of the property for its market value, and ▪ the shareholder is treated as having acquired the property for that market value. The disposal may result in depreciation recovery income for the company (depending on the property’s adjusted tax value compared with its market value). Further, if the recipient uses the property or makes the property available for use to derive assessable income, a depreciation loss deduction may be claimed by the recipient. However, the depreciation may be restricted if the parties are associated (see ¶13-400). Law: IT07 ss FC 1(1)(d), FC 2(1)  ¶13-430 Computer software and depreciation  The kinds of depreciable intangible property listed in sch 14 include the copyright in software, the right to use software copyright and the right to use software. A deduction may be available for the depreciation loss incurred in relation to those matters. Commissioner’s approach to software 1993 policy statement The Commissioner’s approach to the treatment of software was originally contained in a 1993 policy statement (see Appendix to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 10, May 1993). However, since 1993, there have been a number of legislative changes that meant that parts of that statement were out of date. In May 2016, the Commissioner released an interpretation statement, IS 16/01 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016), to update and replace the 1993 statement except for the parts of that earlier statement that deal with taxpayers carrying on a software development business. IS 16/01 was itself replaced in April 2017 by interpretation statement, IS 17/04 (discussed below), to take account of changes to the Commissioner’s position on the deductibility of feasibility expenditure following the Supreme Court decision in Trustpower Ltd v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-061. However, IS 17/04 also does not deal with taxpayers carrying on a software development business. Thus, the only part of the 1993 statement with any continuing relevance is the Commissioner’s approach to software developers, as follows: ▪ development costs may be expensed ▪ the trading stock treatment of value as income at the end of the income year applies to unbilled work in progress and unsold but completed software, and ▪ maintenance costs may be expensed with upgrading costs to be capitalised. However, Inland Revenue (IR) has indicated that this part of the 1993 statement is also to be replaced and, in July 2016, the Commissioner released an issues paper that concluded the  approach taken in the 1993 statement may not always be the most appropriate approach. See discussion below. Interpretation statement IS 17/04 Interpretation statement IS 17/04, “Income tax — Computer software acquired for use in a taxpayer’s business” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 173), covers the income tax treatment of software for taxpayers who purchase, lease, licence, develop, or commission software for use in a business. The statement expressly refers only to taxpayers that are carrying on a business. However, in general, the principles also apply to taxpayers who incur expenditure on software in deriving assessable or excluded income (otherwise than in the course of carrying on a business). The statement does not consider software developers, the treatment of software funded by a government grant, the application of any specific research and development provisions other than s DB 34, or any potential withholding tax obligations a taxpayer may have. In summary, the statement provides for the following income tax implications of acquiring or developing software for use in a business: Software purchases ▪ Software purchased will generally be a capital asset that must be depreciated at 50% diminishing value or 40% straight-line. ▪ An immediate write-off for software costing less than $500 will be allowed where the conditions in s EE 38 are satisfied. ▪ Maintenance costs may be deducted when incurred. ▪ Upgrade costs must be capitalised and depreciated. Periodic payments for the right to use or access software ▪ Periodic payments for the right to use or access software (often online software) are generally deductible when  incurred. Software developed in-house for use in business ▪ In limited situations, a deduction may be allowed for expenditure incurred in determining the feasibility of developing a piece of software for use in a business. Where such a deduction is not available, then unless another provision applies allowing a deduction (such as s DB 34), the expenditure should be capitalised until the software is either completed or abandoned. ▪ If the software is completed for use in the taxpayer’s business, the cost of the software can be depreciated at 50% diminishing value or 40% straight-line. ▪ If software is abandoned before it becomes depreciable property, a deduction may be allowed for the expenditure incurred in developing the software. ▪ Expenditure incurred in maintaining software once it has been completed will generally be deductible when incurred. ▪ Upgrade costs must be capitalised and depreciated. Commissioned software ▪ Expenditure on software commissioned by a taxpayer for use in its business should be capitalised until the software is complete. The costs can then be depreciated over the life of the item. ▪ If the software is abandoned before it becomes depreciable property, a deduction may be allowed for the expenditure incurred in developing the software. Leases of software under finance lease ▪ Software leased under a finance lease is treated as a sale of software by the lessor to the lessee. Also, the lessor is  treated as giving a loan to the lessee for the software and the lessee is treated as using the loan to buy the software. ▪ The Income Tax Act 2007 then applies to the arrangement as recharacterised. ▪ The financial arrangements rules apply to the loan. ▪ The depreciation rules apply as if the lessee owned the software. ▪ The treatment at the end of the finance lease depends on who acquires the rights to the software at the end of the lease term. IS 17/04 also contains a number of examples. The Commissioner regards software as including all programs or routines used to cause a computer to perform a desired task or a set of tasks together with the documentation and training materials required to describe and maintain these programs. The Commissioner considers the following activities are likely to be part of a development phase: gathering and analysing user requirements, designing systems, developing detailed software specifications, constructing programs, testing software, testing acceptance for the user or customer, developing manuals and training material, preparing documents for use in ongoing software product maintenance and providing management review throughout the development phase (for example, quality assurance). Maintenance is regarded by the Commissioner as including costs incurred on providing helpdesk facilities, fixing programming bugs, bringing performance up to the original specifications and making minor changes to the software — that is, routine changes that do not materially increase the capacity or performance of the software. The upgrade of software is treated by the Commissioner as comprising work that adds new features to the software, increases its capacity, performance, or extends the life of the software or  provides a new version of the software that has more capacity or increased performance. See IR booklet “Depreciation — a guide for business” (IR 260), November 2020. The Commissioner’s publications indicate the view that development costs need to be capitalised. However, the Commissioner does acknowledge that an alternative treatment may be available where the expenditure satisfies s DB 34, which allows a deduction for research and development in certain circumstances. Section DB 34 permits a deduction for a range of development costs that are expensed for financial reporting purposes. It is conceivable that those costs may include computer software development costs. See further at ¶10-850. Taxation publications incorporated in electronic versions may be able to be expensed on a current year basis. This is in recognition of their annual life suggesting that the cost of purchase is not expenditure of a capital nature. Issues paper — IRRUIP10 In July 2016, the Commissioner released an issues paper, IRRUIP 10: “Income tax treatment of software development expenditure”. This issues paper considers that part of the 1993 statement that deals with taxpayers carrying on a software development business and acknowledges that the 1993 policy is outdated. For example, the 1993 statement does not consider cloud-based computing, including the provision of software as a service (SaaS), which has become more common in recent years. “Software development expenditure” is defined for the purposes of the issues paper as expenditure incurred by taxpayers in developing software for the purposes of commercial exploitation as part of a business or other income-earning activity carried on by them. Software in this context is software that has an independent form, as opposed to software that is an integral part of a tangible asset. It includes bespoke software commissioned primarily for a single client or product-based software developed for general exploitation.  The issues paper concludes that software development expenditure will generally result in an item of property that is an asset. This means that, unless the expenditure is the cost of producing trading stock, the capital limitation in s DA 2(2) will generally apply to prevent the expenditure being deducted when incurred. The Commissioner’s initial view is that software development expenditure is not the cost of producing trading stock where software is being developed for use in providing SaaS or non-exclusive licensing. The software may be trading stock where it is being produced for sale by way of assignment of all or part of the copyright rights. Where software development expenditure is not the cost of producing trading stock, there are two potential ways the expenditure could be treated for income tax purposes. The first is to treat the software as a depreciable asset. The other potential income tax treatment arises under the research and development (R&D) provisions of the Act. The Commissioner’s initial view is that the R&D provisions may provide immediate deductibility of some software development expenditure to a greater degree than is possible under either the trading stock or depreciable asset treatments. The issues paper suggests a possible change in IR’s current approach concerning trading stock treatment of software development expenditure that would affect the timing of when deductions for software development expenditure are available. The Commissioner has stated that any final view on the issues will apply prospectively. There is no change in the interim to IR’s current practice concerning the income tax treatment of software development expenditure. Assistance will be offered in terms of explaining how developers are able to transition to any new position, should the current position change. Costs of unsuccessful software development A taxpayer may claim a deduction for expenditure incurred on software development for use in their business where: ▪ the development is abandoned at a time when the copyright in the software is not yet depreciable property, and  ▪ the copyright in the software would have been depreciable property if the development had been completed, and ▪ the taxpayer has not claimed a deduction for the expenditure under any other provision of the Act. The deduction may be claimed in the income year in which the development is abandoned. Website The Commissioner regards the cost of developing a business website as capital expenditure that must be subject to the same treatment as computer software. The same treatment applies to costs incurred on a reconstruction or functional improvement of the site. The cost of acquiring a domain name is also regarded as expenditure of a capital nature. However, the Commissioner’s view is that this cost does not give rise to a depreciation loss. Any costs incurred in updating or adding information to a website are regarded as revenue expenditure that is able to be expensed on a current year basis. Any annual fee charged for continued registration of a domain name is also allowed as a deduction in the year incurred. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 8, August 2000 at 21. Law: IT07 s DB 40B, sch 14  ¶13-440 Depreciable intangible property Depreciable intangible property is defined to mean property listed in sch 14. The following items are listed in sch 14 as being depreciable intangible property: ▪ the right to use a copyright ▪ the right to use a design or model, plan, secret formula or process or other like property right  ▪ a patent or the right to use a patent ▪ a patent application with a complete specification lodged after 31 March 2005 ▪ the right to use land ▪ the right to use plant or machinery ▪ the copyright in software, the right to use the copyright in software, or the right to use software ▪ the right to use a trademark ▪ management rights and licence rights created under the Radiocommunications Act 1989 ▪ a resource consent to do something that otherwise would contravene ss 12–15B of the Resource Management Act 1991 (other than a consent for a reclamation), granted in or after: □ the 1996–97 income year, if the consent relates to ss 12–15 of that Act, or □ the 2014–15 income year, if the consent relates to ss 15A and 15B of that Act ▪ the copyright in a sound recording that was produced or purchased after 30 June 1997 where copies of the recording are sold to the public ▪ plant variety rights granted by statute ▪ a right to use plant variety rights granted by statute ▪ for the 2015–16 and later income years, a design registration ▪ for the 2015–16 and later income years, a design registration application, and  ▪ for the 2015–16 and later income years, industrial artistic copyright. For property to be listed in sch 14 the item in question must be intangible and have a finite useful life that can be estimated on the date of acquisition with a reasonable degree of certainty. However, the legislation clarifies that any property that is listed in sch 14 but which does not have those features will still be treated as depreciable property. Certain types of depreciable intangible property may be further categorised as “fixed life intangible property”. This is depreciable intangible property that has a legal life. For example, patents are fixed life intangible property because a patent is granted for 20 years. The legal life of the property becomes the basis of the period for which a depreciation loss may be allowed as a deduction. Fixed life intangible property can only be depreciated using the straight-line method for calculating depreciation loss. See further at ¶13-450. The High Court has noted that to be depreciable, an item of intangible property must be property that in normal circumstances might reasonably be expected to decline in value while it is used or available for use in deriving assessable income or in carrying on a business for such purpose. ANZCO claimed a depreciation deduction for a payment made under a settlement to vary an encumbrance on land it purchased on the basis that it conferred a right to use land. The High Court found that what ANZCO obtained from the settlement was not a right to use land but the removal of a contractual restriction over its existing rights of use. The rights released were no longer subject to a fixed term but continued to run with the land and could not reasonably be expected to decline in value over time. What was obtained by ANZCO did not fall within the definition of depreciable intangible property. See ANZCO Foods Ltd v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-049. The “right to use a trademark” refers to the licence that a trademark owner may grant to a licensee for an agreed period. It does not refer to the trademark itself. The trademark owner does not hold a “right to use a trademark” that can be classified as a form of depreciable  intangible property within the scope of sch 14. See Trustees in the CB Simkin Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,001 (PC). The purchase of depreciable intangible property from an associated person does not give rise to a deduction for a depreciation loss for the purchaser. This is where the property was not depreciable property that was listed in sch 14 at the time of acquisition by the vendor, and the cost was not allowed as a deduction outside the depreciation regime. This restriction reflects historical developments. It endeavours to ensure that a depreciation loss does not become available through the transfer of depreciable intangible property that had not previously conferred a depreciation loss for the transferor. The transferor may not have been able to claim the depreciation loss because the property was not listed in sch 14 at the time of its acquisition by that person. Law: IT07 ss EE 43, EE 62, sch 14  ¶13-450 Fixed life intangible property Fixed life intangible property is property that: ▪ is depreciable intangible property, being a kind of intangible property listed in sch 14, and ▪ has a legal life that could reasonably be expected at acquisition to equate with the property’s remaining estimated useful life. The notion of legal life is the period of the property’s remaining existence, inclusive of any renewal period that is unconditional or conditional upon the payment of predetermined fees. Example: Sci Fi Ltd obtains a five-year licence to use a trademark for $30,000 paid at the outset with a five-year extension on payment of $10,000 at the start of year six. The depreciation loss is calculated as follows:  Years 1 to 5 Legal life: 10 years Depreciation rate: 10% SL (1/10 years) Depreciation = 10% × $30,000 × 5 years =  $15,000  Years 6 to 10 Legal life: 5 years Adjusted tax value: $15,000 ($30,000 − $15,000) Depreciation rate: 20% SL (1/5 years) Depreciation = 20% × ($15,000 + $10,000) × 5 years = $25,000 Total depreciation for years 1 to 10  $40,000  Law: IT07 s EE 67, sch 14  ¶13-460 Depreciation implications of franchise agreements It is possible that there are depreciation implications for a franchisee who enters into a franchise agreement. The franchise agreement itself is not depreciable property. However, some of the rights conferred by the agreement may be depreciable intangible property that gives rise to a deduction for a depreciation loss (¶13-034). Examples could be the grant to the franchisee of the right to use a trade mark or the right to use a secret formula or process. A depreciation loss may potentially be available if the consideration payable by the franchisee can be attributed to components that are depreciable intangible property. If the rights purchased can be classified as depreciable intangible property, it continues to be necessary to satisfy an additional requirement of the concept before a depreciation loss becomes available. That additional requirement is to the effect that the rights must have a finite life that can be estimated at acquisition with a reasonable degree of certainty. In most instances, that finite life can be expected to be the legal life of the rights, which can take into  account rights of renewal. If so, a depreciation loss calculated under the straight-line method would be applicable. The Commissioner has given the following example to illustrate the position. Example: Cherrypoppin Ltd paid $50,000 to acquire the New Zealand franchise rights to manufacture and distribute Rolloseal towel rails. The franchise agreement is for 10 years with renewal rights for a further five years. The majority of the $50,000 franchise fee went to capital expenditure, but $20,000 of the fee related to the right to use a patent. The franchise was acquired on 1 April 2005 to extend until 1 April 2015, with the right of renewal for a further five years, subject to paying a renewal fee of $2,000. The right to use the patent is fixed-life intangible property. Upon purchase, it appeared that the right to use the patent would remain valuable to the end of its legal life. The legal life of this fixed-life intangible property is 10 years, plus a five-year renewal period. The straight-line depreciation rate to be used by Cherrypoppin Ltd is therefore: 1 = 6.67% (rounded) on cost of 15 $20,000.  This topic is addressed by the Commissioner in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 8, November 1996 at 19. Lotto franchise fee The Commissioner’s view is that payment of a Lotto franchise fee does not give rise to a depreciation loss. The value of the rights granted are not expected to decline in value. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 8, January 1995 at 15.  ¶13-465 Geothermal wells and depreciation A geothermal well is defined as “a bore or well solely for the purposes of investigating or exploiting geothermal energy in New Zealand”. The rules recognise that the capital costs associated with failed wells should be deductible. If a failed well is subsequently sold or brought back into production the amount previously allowed as a deduction  (or the sale proceeds, whichever is lower) is written back. In other cases, geothermal wells are to be depreciated over their useful life, from the date the well is completed. Geothermal wells owned during the “proving period” are treated as depreciable property (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 62). Law: IT07 ss EE 6(4), EE 44(2)(c), EE 45(7), EE 47(6), YA 1  ¶13-470 Gifts of depreciable property It is possible for a gift to be depreciable property. For a discussion by the Commissioner of what a gift is, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 5, July 2005 at 31. The treatment of a gift of depreciable property is that the donor must treat the transaction as a disposal at the then market value of the property. This may create an item of depreciation recovery income for the donor, depending upon the asset’s adjusted tax value compared with its market value. The recipient of the gift is treated as having acquired the property at the donor’s market value. A depreciation loss will be available if the recipient uses or makes the asset available for use to derive assessable income. However, the depreciation may be restricted if the parties are associated (see ¶13-400). Law: IT07 ss FC 1(1)(e), FC 2(1)  ¶13-480 Transfer of depreciable property between group companies The Commissioner’s approach to the transfer of depreciable property between members of a wholly-owned group is that the sale price must be based upon the property’s market value. The transfer of depreciable assets on amalgamation is discussed at ¶13-390.  ¶13-500 Land improvements that may give rise to depreciation loss A range of land improvements may give rise to a depreciation loss. These are the improvements listed in sch 13. It is not necessary for the improvements to have occurred in the context of agricultural activities. The improvements listed in sch 13 comprise airport runways, bores and wells, bridges, chimneys, culverts, dams, fences, hardstanding (for example, asphalt carpark), reservoirs, retaining walls, roads, spillways, swimming pools, tanks, tunnels, wharves, pipes, and purpose-built surfaces for outdoor sports facilities. Law: IT07 s EE 7(a), sch 13  ¶13-503 Depreciation of finance leases Special rules cover depreciation in relation to finance leases. For tax purposes, a finance lease includes a lease that involves a term that is more than 75% of the relevant asset’s estimated useful life at the time that the person enters the lease, or at a later time. A lease which involves the transfer of ownership of the asset to the lessee, or an associate, or the lessee having the option to acquire the asset for an amount that is likely to be substantially lower than the asset’s market value at the date of acquisition is also classified as a finance lease. For the duration of the lease term the ownership of the leased asset is effectively recharacterised so that the lessee becomes the deemed owner of the asset and, consequently, is able to claim depreciation. The lessor may not claim a deduction for a depreciation loss. Early termination and depreciation recovery In the event of an early termination in which the lessee does not purchase the lease asset, the lessor includes as income the outstanding amount of the loan principal. This amount is reduced by  any amount payable by the lessee in consideration for early termination. These rules extend to transactions involving the sale and leaseback of an intangible asset. In some cases, the lessor will reacquire the lease asset before the end of the lease term. Law: IT07 ss CC 11, CC 12, CH 6, FA 6–FA 11, YA 1  ¶13-510 Depreciation — loose tools Loose tools may be regarded as the equipment of a tradesperson. Loose tools would not include items that become, for example, part of the materials to erect a structure. Loose tools may be eligible for treatment as a low-value item whose cost is allowed as a deduction in the year of purchase. The threshold for treatment as a low-value item is $500 per asset. See further at ¶13-054.  ¶13-520 Motor vehicles and depreciation Depreciation rates for motor vehicles Generally, the economic depreciation rates for motor vehicles are set by the Commissioner by determination and are listed in the schedules of depreciation rates — see CCH, New Zealand Depreciation Rates. The economic rate for certain passengercarrying motor vehicles (eg taxis and minibuses) is set by legislation. Apportionment of business use of motor vehicle Subpart DE sets out the rules for determining the proportion of business use of a motor vehicle to its total use. Determining the component of business use assists with calculating the depreciation loss allowed in relation to the motor vehicle. The rules only apply to self-employed people. The apportionment rules also apply to deductions for motor vehicle expenses — see ¶10-710. To calculate a year’s depreciation loss, a self-employed person applies the following formula: standard calculation × business proportion  where: standard calculation is the standard calculation of a depreciation loss based upon the number of months during which the vehicle is used or is available for use (see ¶13-104), and business proportion is the decimal representing the proportion of business travel as a component of total travel as determined under one of the four permitted methods. The depreciation loss is effectively the proportion of a full year’s depreciation loss reflecting the component for business travel and the number of months of availability for use. Example: Ms Smith is a self-employed beauty consultant who has calculated that her car is used 85% for business purposes. The car’s adjusted tax value is $18,000 and she owns it for the entire income year. Assume the applicable depreciation value rate is 36% DV. First, applying the standard calculation: 18,000 × 36% ×  12 12  = $6,480  Second, applying the formula to calculate the year’s depreciation loss: $6,480 × 0.85 = $5,508 The deduction for depreciation for the income year becomes $5,508. However, the adjusted tax value of the car reduces by the full $6,480 to $11,520.  Disposal of the vehicle A different formula applies for the income year in which there is a disposal of the vehicle. The formula is the following: disposal depreciation loss × all deductions ÷ (base value − adjusted tax value)  where: disposal depreciation loss is any depreciation loss arising upon disposal if the consideration received is less than adjusted tax value all deductions is all prior year deductions for a depreciation loss in relation to the vehicle base value is the vehicle’s cost, and adjusted tax value is the vehicle’s adjusted tax value at the time of disposal. Another formula applies where a vehicle is brought into business use and disposed of in the same income year. The formula is the following: disposal depreciation loss × business proportion where: disposal depreciation loss is any depreciation loss arising upon disposal if the consideration received is less than the adjusted tax value business proportion is the decimal representing the proportion of business travel as a component of total travel as determined under one of the four permitted methods. Law: IT07 ss DE 2, EE 29(3), EE 31  ¶13-540 Depreciation — patents and design registrations Patents or the right to use a patent are a form of fixed life intangible property (see further at ¶13-450). Patents are granted for a term of 20 years, and the tenor of the depreciation provisions is to allow a deduction for a depreciation loss in respect of the cost of a patent as from the date of lodging a patent application with a complete specification. Commencement of the deduction is not deferred until  the patent is granted but is available during the time that the patent application is pending. Included in the cost of a patent are the legal and administrative costs incurred in applying for the patent, additional costs incurred for a patent (s EE 19), and, for the 2015–16 and later income years, expenditure for underlying intangible items (s EE 18B). Costs incurred in a patent application that is withdrawn or declined are allowed as a deduction when the application becomes unsuccessful. From the 2014–15 income year, a deduction is also allowed for costs incurred in a patent application that is not lodged. In addition, deductions will be clawed back if application property is subsequently sold or used in the lodging of a patent application. In the latter case, the clawed back amount will be included in the cost of the intangible property to be depreciated over the life of the depreciable asset. See further at ¶10-750. Patent applications lodged on or after 1 April 2005 A depreciation rate may be ascertained under s EE 33 in relation to a patent application lodged with the Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand or an overseas equivalent with a complete specification on or after 1 April 2005. This rate continues to apply until the application is granted, refused or withdrawn. The depreciation rate that is found under the formula in s EE 33 applies to the costs of creating the patent, as from the income year in which the patent application is lodged. The result is that the deduction allowed for the depreciation loss on the patent is not deferred until such time as the patent application is granted. The legal life of the patent application is the legal life the patent would have if it was granted when the application was first lodged. If the application is granted, another depreciation rate needs to be found and applied. For the tax treatment of patents lodged before 1 April 2005, see CCH, Master Tax Guide 2007, ¶13-540. Patents granted or acquired on or after 1 April 2005  A depreciation rate is determined under s EE 34 for a patent acquired or granted in the 2005–06 or later income year. If the patent application was depreciated, the cost of the patent for depreciation purposes is the adjusted book value of the patent application at the start of the month that the patent is granted, together with any additional costs. The legal life of the patent is defined in s EE 34 for the purposes of that section. Section EE 44(2)(b) clarifies that no depreciation recovery calculation needs to take place when a patent application is granted. The depreciation rate found under the formula in s EE 34 applies with effect from the income year in which the patent is granted for the remaining legal life. Capitalised development expenditure and design registrations Before 1 April 2015, costs associated with the actual invention that is subject to a patent or patent application were neither deductible nor depreciable. However, changes were made with effect from 1 April 2015 for the 2015–16 and later income years. Capitalised development expenditure (incurred on or after 7 November 2013) that relates to a patent or patent application may be included as part of the depreciable costs of the relevant depreciable intangible asset for taxpayers that have carried out R&D that has led to them acquiring one of these depreciable intangible assets. In addition, design registrations (and applications for design registration) were made depreciable by adding them to sch 14 of the Income Tax Act 2007. A design registration is defined to mean a registration of a design under the Designs Act 1953 and includes a similar registration and protection of a design under a foreign law. Capitalised expenditure (incurred on or after 7 November 2013) in creating the design is also able to be included as part of the depreciable costs of a design registration (and associated application) for taxpayers that have created a design that they have applied to have registered, as well as legal and administrative fees incurred in the design registration process. Commissioner’s interpretation statement  In June 2017, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement IS 17/05, “Income tax — treatment of New Zealand patents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 4), which discusses the income tax treatment of patents, including their costs and depreciation, and also provides examples of the operation of the provisions. The statement updates and replaces the Commissioner’s earlier statement on the income tax treatment of patents, released in July 2006 by updating legislative references, discussing legislative changes and recording a change of view by the Commissioner on the treatment of patent maintenance and renewal fees (see ¶10-750) and expenditure for underlying intangible items after asset recognition. Section EE 18B provides that the cost of the patent for depreciation purposes includes expenditure by the taxpayer for underlying intangible items. The Commissioner’s view has changed in this area since the July 2006 statement as a result of the introduction of this provision. To meet the requirements of s EE 18B, the underlying item must give rise to, support or be an item in which the person incurring the expenditure holds the patent. IS 17/05 gives the example of an invention supporting or giving rise to the patent. Research and development costs incurred in devising an intangible invention, in respect of which a patent is sought, would be included in the depreciable value of that patent or the right to use that patent (provided no other deduction has been allowed for the R&D expenditure). The following example from the statement illustrates this point: Example: Business C begins an R&D project during May 2016. After 18 months of R&D, Business C recognises an invention resulting from the R&D as an intangible asset for financial reporting purposes. The R&D expenditure incurred by Business C, up to the point of asset recognition, may be deductible under the general permission (s DA 1) or under the specific R&D provisions in s DB 33 or DB 34. Subsequently, Business C incurs some capitalised development expenditure further refining the invention. An invention is an intangible asset that is not an item of depreciable intangible property. Business C then applies for a patent for the invention, filing a patent application with a complete specification. A patent application with a complete specification lodged on or  after 1 April 2005 is an item of depreciable intangible property. The depreciable cost of the patent application comprises the administrative and legal fees Business C incurred in applying for the patent and the capitalised development expenditure Business C incurred on refining the intangible invention. The capitalised development expenditure is included in the depreciable cost of the patent application because the invention is an underlying item of intangible property in which Business C holds the patent application. If the patent is subsequently granted, the depreciable cost of the patent will also include the capitalised development expenditure Business C incurred on refining the invention, if it has not already been deducted as depreciation of the patent application. On the granting of a patent, the patent application costs form part of the adjusted tax value of the patent and the amounts continue to be depreciated over the legal life. In terms of s EE 44(2)(b), there is no disposal of the patent application when that application has “concluded because a patent is granted to the person in relation to the application”. If the taxpayer has purchased the patent application, patent or patent rights, then the cost to the taxpayer is depreciable. In this case, the taxpayer has purchased either the application for or the right to use a particular invention, which is protected by a patent, and to exclude others from such use. It is the cost incurred in buying that application or right that is depreciable. There is no disposal of the patent application when the patent is granted (in the case of a taxpayer purchasing a patent application).  Law: IT07 ss DZ 15, EE 16(4)(b), EE 18B, EE 19, EE 33, EE 34, EE 34B, EE 44(2)(b), (bb), EE 67  ¶13-550 Depreciation — petroleum assets The depreciation loss for petroleum-related depreciable property is essentially calculated on a daily basis in light of the special nature of the assets. Petroleum-related depreciable property encompasses drilling rigs and support vessels for drilling rigs and production platforms. On the assumption that the depreciation loss on petroleum assets, calculated under any of the general methods, results in a higher loss, the formula for calculating the depreciation loss becomes: annual rate × value or cost × days ÷ 365 where: annual rate is the appropriate annual rate under the depreciation method adopted for the asset  value or cost is: — the asset’s adjusted tax value at the end of the previous income year if the diminishing value method is applied, or — the asset’s cost if the straight-line method is applied days is the number of days in the income year during which the person owns the asset and uses it or has it available for use for any purpose. A depreciation loss can arise in the year petroleum-related depreciable property is disposed of. This is an exception to the general rule that no depreciation loss is calculated in the year of disposal for an asset. The depreciation recovery provisions neither apply to the disposal, nor do they apply if the property is removed from New Zealand and the New Zealand tax base. Under s EE 59, the purchase of petroleum assets from an associated person can be subject to continued application of the transferor’s cost. Law: IT07 ss EE 17, EE 59, EE 67  ¶13-560 Depreciation — plant variety rights Depreciable intangible property includes both plant variety rights granted under the Plant Variety Rights Act 1987 or similar foreign statute and the right to use plant variety rights. Plant variety rights are fixed life intangible property. Plant variety rights are granted for terms of 20 or 23 years, depending upon the plant material. For depreciation purposes the legal life of a plant variety right is the total of its legal duration under the contract or statute that creates it and the number of months during which the person owned the plant variety rights application. The depreciation rate for plant variety rights is ascertained under s EE 33. For a further discussion of fixed life intangible property, see ¶13-034 and ¶13-450. For plant variety rights granted in the 2005–06 or later income years, a one-off deduction is available in the income year in which a plant variety rights application is granted for any costs associated with the  plant variety rights application that are otherwise unable to be deducted. With effect from the 2014–15 income year, a deduction is available for costs incurred in applying for the grant of plant variety rights where the plant variety rights are not obtained because the application is not lodged or is withdrawn, or because the grant is refused. In addition, such deductions will be clawed back if the application property is subsequently sold or used in obtaining a grant of plant variety rights. In the latter case, the clawed back amount is included in the cost of the intangible property to be depreciated over the life of the depreciable asset. See further at ¶10-760. With effect from 1 April 2015 for the 2015–16 and later income years, capitalised development expenditure (incurred on or after 7 November 2013) that relates to plant variety rights is now allowed to be included as part of the depreciable costs of the relevant depreciable intangible asset for taxpayers that have carried out research and development (R&D) that has led to them acquiring one of these depreciable intangible assets. Law: IT07 ss EE 18B, EE 25, EE 33, EE 67, sch 14  ¶13-570 Depreciation — radiocommunications licences Depreciable intangible property includes management rights and licence rights created under the Radiocommunications Act 1989. There is a prohibition on further depreciation if a licence right is granted to an associated person of a holder of management rights. The prohibition arises in relation to a transaction of that kind because the cost of the licence right to the associated person is treated as being zero. The prohibition does not apply where the Secretary of Commerce acts as the manager. Law: IT07 s EE 42, sch 14  ¶13-580 Depreciation and relationship property transfers  Depreciable property may be transferred on a settlement of relationship property. In that event: ▪ the transferor is treated as having disposed of the property for its adjusted tax value at the start of the income year (or cost if the property was purchased during the income year) ▪ the transferee is treated as having incurred a cost of acquisition equivalent to the transferor’s transfer value ▪ the transferee is treated as having had a depreciation loss equivalent to the transferor’s depreciation loss ▪ the transferee’s depreciation loss for a building must have regard to the transferor’s cost for the building, and ▪ the transferee cannot have a greater depreciation loss than that which could have been obtained by the transferor. The transferee essentially assumes the depreciation profile of the transferor and continues with the transferor’s calculation of the available depreciation loss. Depreciation recovery income is not recognised on the transfer. A “settlement of relationship property” means a transaction between parties to a relationship agreement that creates a disposal and acquisition of property under subpart FB. Broadly, a “relationship agreement” is an agreement for the purposes of Pt 6 of the Property (Relationships) Act 1976 or under an order under s 25 of that Act. Law: IT07 ss FB 1B, FB 21  ¶13-585 Depreciation — resource consents Depreciable intangible property includes a resource consent to do something that otherwise would contravene ss 12–15B of the Resource Management Act 1991 (other than a consent for a reclamation), granted in or after:  ▪ the 1996–97 income year, if the consent relates to ss 12–15 of that Act, or ▪ the 2014–15 income year, if the consent relates to ss 15A and 15B of that Act. Interpretation statement on resource consent expenditure In November 2018, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 18/06, “Income tax — treatment of costs of resource consents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 11, December 2018 at 10). The statement discusses whether deductions for the expenditure incurred in obtaining environmental and land consents are available and on what basis. The ability to deduct or depreciate expenditure on a resource consent depends on the type of expenditure, the type of consent and the resulting asset. Environmental consents broadly concern the environment, are granted under ss 12–15B of the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA), and are listed in sch 14 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Land consents broadly concern land, are granted under s 9 or 11 of the RMA and are not listed in sch 14. The statement provides the following two flowcharts to assist in deciding whether the expenditure is deductible or depreciable. (Note the paragraph references are to paragraphs in the statement.) Flowchart 1: Environmental consents — ss 12–15 of the RMA excluding reclamation consents — treatment of expenditure  Flowchart 2: Land consents — ss 9 and 11 of the RMA plus reclamation consents — treatment of expenditure  The statement considers the earlier Supreme Court decision in Trustpower v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-061 and Interpretation Statement IS 17/01, “Income tax — deductibility of feasibility expenditure” (for discussion on these, see ¶10-440) and concludes that resource consent expenditure is usually on capital account and there is limited scope for deductible feasibility expenditure in the context of applying for a resource consent. However, where property is “revenue account property” its cost is deductible under s DB 23. An exception identified in Trustpower is land developers where the expenditure is on revenue account. Environmental consents are items of depreciable intangible property and the expenditure that forms the cost base can be depreciated over the fixed term of the consent.  Example 1: Incin-a-lot Ltd is building an additional incinerator for medical waste. The council has granted Incin-a-lot Ltd a 25-year environmental consent to discharge contaminants into the atmosphere from this incinerator. The consent cost is $50,000, including legal fees, application fees, design and engineering reports, scientific reports and an environmental report. The costs of the environmental consent are depreciated over the legal life on a straight-line basis. This means the cost of $50,000 is depreciated over a 25-year period resulting in a straight-line depreciation deduction of $2,000 a year. However, developing contracts with customers has been slower than expected and the new incinerator will not be put into operation until next year. Further, due to high operating temperatures, this particular kind of incinerator only has a 10-year useful life. Does this change how the costs are depreciated? No. The environmental consent can be depreciated from the point where the consent is available to be used. It is available to use, and the costs are depreciable, despite the incinerator not actually being used until the following year. The incinerator’s shorter useful life does not affect the environmental consent. The environmental consent should be depreciated as a separate item of depreciable intangible property over its fixed term. Incin-a-lot Ltd may wish to surrender the environmental consent once the incinerator is no longer in use and write off the remaining amount of the un-depreciated cost of the consent.  Land consents are generally of unlimited duration and will not usually be depreciable property. In exceptional cases a land consent may be depreciable as a right to use land, in which case the treatment is the same as for environmental consents. Expenditure on land consents can usually only be depreciated to the extent that the expenditure can be capitalised into the cost of another item of depreciable property. No depreciation deduction is available for any expenditure capitalised into the cost of land or buildings (with an estimated useful life of more 50 years). For land consents, deductibility under s DB 19 for unsuccessful consents may not be possible as it depends on the depreciation outcome (see ¶10-860). However, some expenditure may be deductible if it is for pollution control (see ¶10-242). Example 2: Expenditure on two land consents Incin-a-lot Ltd obtains a land consent to build a new chimney at their existing premises. It needs a land consent because the district plan places a restriction on building structures over a certain height. The expenditure on the land consent forms part of the cost of the chimney, which is an item of depreciable property. Consequently, the company can add the expenditure on the land consent to the cost of the chimney and depreciate it at the applicable rate. As a condition of the resource consent, the council requires Incin-a-lot Ltd to build an earth wall close to the state highway so that the new chimney is less visible from the road. The earth wall requires a land consent for the earthworks and contouring. The expenditure on the resource consent for the earth wall cannot be allocated to the cost of the chimney. The earth wall is functionally and physically distinct from the chimney. Expenditure to obtain the land consent is directly attributable to the earth wall. That means that expenditure on the land consent can be capitalised into the cost of the earth wall.  Cost and expenditure that may be incurred The statement also considers what constitutes “cost” and notes there is very little assistance in the legislation. The Commissioner considers the following principles are key: ▪ cost includes that which must be given in order to acquire something ▪ cost includes expenses incurred in having an asset installed and ready to use but cost is fixed once the asset is capable of being used ▪ cost includes subsequent expenditure after this point only to the extent it is allowed under the Act, and ▪ cost does not include all expenditure associated with the asset where it does not satisfy one of the above principles. The Commissioner provides examples of expenditure that may be incurred on a resource consent in the statement. Law: IT07 ss DB 19, EE 62, sch 14  ¶13-600 Trustee and executor distributions of depreciable property