 vehicle is reduced by: 10% × number of days in period ÷ 365  Example 1: Employer Co Ltd pays FBT on an income-year basis. It has received written approval from Inland Revenue to change its balance date from 31 March to 30 June. The first year of application is the 2019–20 income year; therefore, the income year ended 31 March 2020 will be a 15-month period from 1 April 2019 to 30 June 2020 (an extra 91 days). Employer Co makes a motor vehicle available for private use to a shareholderemployee, Fred. Fred owns 20% of the motor vehicle provided. The GST-inclusive cost price of the motor vehicle is $50,000. The taxable value of the fringe benefit provided in the 2019–20 income year is: ($50,000 × 20%) − (457/365 × $10,000 × 10%) = $10,000 − $1,252.05 = $8,747.95  This percentage reduction in the value of the fringe benefit is itself reduced in the case of employees who do not own part of the motor vehicle for the whole of an income year or other accounting period. Here, the reduction is adjusted by the proportion: period of non-ownership (in days) ÷ total days in income year or other period The net effect of this is to increase the value of the taxable fringe benefit under consideration. Example 2: Employer Co Ltd pays FBT on an income-year basis. It has received written approval from Inland Revenue to change its balance date from 31 March to 30 June. The first year of application is the 2019–20 income year; therefore, the income year ended 31 March 2020 will be a 15-month period from 1 April 2019 to 30 June 2020 (an extra 91 days). Employer Co makes a motor vehicle available for private use to a shareholderemployee, Lucy. Lucy acquired a 30% interest in the motor vehicle provided on 1 August 2019. The GST-inclusive cost price of the motor vehicle is $30,000. The taxable value of the fringe benefit provided in the 2019–20 income year is: number of days in period = 457 days (1 April 2019 to 30 June 2020) period of non-ownership of motor vehicle = 122 days (1 April 2019 to 31 July 2019) period of ownership of motor vehicle = 335 days (457 − 122) Lucy’s portion of cost price of motor vehicle = $9,000 (30% of $30,000)  ($30,000 × 20%) − (335/365 × $9,000 × 10%) = $6,000 − $826.03 = $5,173.97  QWBA on treatment of an employee contribution to a fringe benefit In August 2019, Inland Revenue released a question we’ve been asked, QB 19/12, “What is the fringe benefit tax, GST and income tax treatment of an employee contribution to a fringe benefit?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 62). The item explains how an employer must treat an employee contribution to a fringe benefit. The answer depends on whether the employee makes a full or partial contribution to the value of the fringe benefit and who the employee makes the payment to. QB 19/12 notes that an employee contribution may be made in different ways. For an employee, payment might involve meeting an expense that would otherwise be an expense of the business. For example, an employee with a company vehicle might sometimes pay for petrol for that vehicle. For a shareholder-employee, payment might occur by debiting the shareholder-employee’s current account with the employer company. However, an effective salary sacrifice arrangement is not treated as an employee contribution to a fringe benefit. An effective salary sacrifice arrangement is where an employee agrees to reduce their salary by an agreed amount in recognition of their employer providing them with a fringe benefit. The item’s conclusions are summarised in the following table:  Fringe benefit tax  Partial contribution  Full contribution  The taxable value of the fringe benefit is reduced by the contribution. The reduced taxable value of the benefit is subject to FBT and is included in the  The taxable value of the fringe benefit is nil so there is no FBT liability. However, a nil FBT return must be filed as a  employer’s FBT return.  fringe benefit has still been provided.  GST on fringe benefit  GST is imposed on The taxable value the taxable value of of the fringe the fringe benefit (the benefit is reduced value of the fringe to nil so there is no benefit less the GST liability. contribution). This amount is paid in the employer’s FBT return and is deemed to be FBT.  GST on contributions to employers  A contribution made to the employer is consideration for a supply by the employer and must be accounted for in the employer’s GST return. A contribution to a third party will not be consideration for a supply by the employer.  Income tax  A contribution made to the employer is income of the employer and must be included in the employer’s income tax return, net of GST. The employer may claim relevant deductions relating to the fringe benefit. A contribution to a third party will not become income of the employer.  GST treatment of contributions When an employer supplies an employee with a fringe benefit, that supply is deemed to be a supply of goods and services by the employer in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity (s 21I of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act)). The supply will be valued under s 10(7) of the GST Act using the FBT taxable value. However, the provision of a fringe benefit will be a supply only to the extent that the employee has not paid an amount for the receipt or  enjoyment of the fringe benefit. If an employee makes a partial contribution to the employer for receiving the fringe benefit, the supply must be split into two supplies — a supply of a fringe benefit and a supply of the good or service the employee has paid for. There will also be no supply of a fringe benefit for GST purposes if the fringe benefit arises out of an exempt or zero-rated supply. QB 19/12 also contains a number of examples that illustrate how the law works, including the following: Example 3: Partial contribution towards the cost of a fringe benefit Marjorie is the top salesperson at Bob’s Discount Furniture Ltd for 2018. As part of an incentive programme, Marjorie is to be awarded a brand new 49-inch TV, valued at $2,000 (GST inclusive). However, Marjorie would like something a little larger. She has her eye on a 65-inch smart TV currently selling for $3,000 (GST inclusive). Before Bob goes to purchase the TV for Marjorie (from a third-party supplier), she asks if she can pay the difference so she can get the TV of her dreams. Bob is happy to oblige, so Marjorie transfers $1,000 into the company account and Bob buys her the $3,000 TV. FBT: Bob’s accountant takes the total amount of Marjorie’s employee contribution ($1,000, GST-inclusive) and deducts this from the value of the TV fringe benefit ($3,000, GST-inclusive). She then calculates both GST and FBT payable on the taxable value of the fringe benefit less the contribution and includes both the GST and the FBT in the FBT quarterly return. Bob’s Discount Furniture files quarterly using the single rate option so the FBT payable on this fringe benefit is $985 ($2,000 x 49.25%). The GST payable is $260.87 ($2,000 x 3 ÷ 23). GST: Marjorie’s contribution is consideration for the general supply of the TV. Bob’s Discount Furniture can claim GST back on the full price of the TV ($3,000). The accountant then includes the GST-inclusive amount of Marjorie’s employee contribution ($1,000) as income in the company’s next GST return. Income Tax: The accountant claims a deduction for $2,608.70, being the full GSTexclusive cost of the TV and includes the GST-exclusive amount of Marjorie’s contribution as income of the company for income tax purposes.  Example 4: An employee pays a third party for petrol Supreme Carpet Ltd allows its employee, Tony, to take home a work van for private use in the weekend as long as he pays for his own petrol. Tony must fill up on the business account on Friday night and then fill up again using his own funds on Sunday evening. He records the value of his petrol payments in a log book. FBT: The taxable value of the fringe benefit is the value of the benefit as determined under the motor vehicle fringe benefit rules in sch 5 of the Income Tax Act 2007. This  value is an approximation of the capital and running costs of the vehicle and includes petrol. Therefore, when Tony pays for petrol (either directly to Supreme or to a third party like a petrol station), this will reduce the value of the benefit. The Supreme accountant takes Tony’s petrol payments (including GST) and deducts this from the value of the van that has been made available to him for private use over the quarter. She then calculates both FBT and GST payable on the taxable value and includes both the FBT and GST in the FBT quarterly return. GST: Supreme providing the van to Tony is a fringe benefit and is treated as being a supply of goods and services under s 21I(1). However, it is not treated as a supply to the extent that Tony paid an amount for the receipt or enjoyment of the benefit (s 21I(2)(a)). Further, there is no supply between Supreme and Tony for which the petrol payments could be consideration for GST purposes. Supreme cannot claim any input tax on the cost of the petrol paid by Tony as that was a cost that was incurred by Tony and was not reimbursed by Supreme. Income Tax: The payments made by Tony to the petrol station for petrol are not included in Supreme’s income tax return. Supreme did not receive or otherwise earn this amount, so it is not Supreme’s income.  Law: IT07 ss RD 54–RD 57, sch 5 cl 9, cl 10  LOANS TO EMPLOYEES ¶21-340 Loans giving rise to FBT Any loan provided by an employer (or other related party under an arrangement) to an employee at a favourable rate of interest is a fringe benefit which can give rise to a liability for FBT. FBT is calculated by comparing the interest on the loan with interest calculated using the “prescribed” rate or, in the case of an employer in the business of lending money to the public who has made an election, the market interest. Definition of loan “Loan” is defined to include an amount of money lent (ie by depositing it into a person’s account), giving credit (including not enforcing a debt), a loan or credit given under an obligation or arrangement and money given in return for a promissory note (or a similar arrangement where the promise is not evidenced in writing). A loan would, therefore, include the debit balance in the current  account of a shareholder-employee of a private company. See ¶21410. Normal trade credit (eg payment due on the 20th of the following month) given by an employer to employees does not fall within the definition of “loan”, provided the employees are treated no differently from other customers of the employer. Loans that are not fringe benefits The following types of loans are not fringe benefits: ▪ an employee share loan (see ¶21-568) ▪ a loan made under a share purchase scheme (see ¶21-564) ▪ an amount that is a PAYE-related overpayment (see ¶5-290) ▪ an advance of salary and wages of up to $2,000 where the employment contract does not require the employer to make the advance. Note that the provisions relating to “share purchase schemes” were repealed with effect from 29 March 2018 and replaced by new provisions relating to “exempt employee share schemes” (exempt ESS) (see ¶3-471). It is intended that loans made under an exempt ESS will also not constitute a fringe benefit. However, the fringe benefit exclusion provision has not yet been amended to reflect this. See ¶21-564 for further discussion. Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(i), CX 10, YA 1  ¶21-350 FBT — taxable value of loan benefit The taxable value of the fringe benefit depends on the time at which the loan was made, the terms of the loan and whether the rate of interest payable on the loan is less than the “prescribed interest” or, for some employers, the market interest (see further below). Prescribed rate of interest  For an employer who has not made an election to use the market interest to calculate the taxable value of providing a loan (this applies only to employers who are in the business of lending money to the public, see further below), the taxable value is calculated by determining the interest at the prescribed rate as accrued over the quarter (or other period) on the daily balance of the outstanding loan. The interest that has been paid by the employee is then deducted to give the taxable value of any benefit. If the loan is a financial arrangement and it is appropriate, the value of the benefit is the amount by which the prescribed interest on the loan exceeds the income that would have accrued to the employer calculated under the yield to maturity method. Prescribed interest rates are set by regulation under s RA 21(3). These prescribed rates are typically published in a Tax Information Bulletin and on the Inland Revenue website. For a table of past and present rates, see ¶50-082. If the actual interest (or if relevant, the actual income accrued to the employer under the yield to maturity method) is equal to or exceeds the prescribed rate, there is no fringe benefit for the quarter or period in respect of the loan. Example: Mr Jones is a bank officer who received a housing loan of $36,000 from the bank on 1 May 2019 with an interest rate of 5%. For the quarter ending 30 June 2019, he pays interest of $301, while interest calculated on a daily basis at the prescribed rate of 5.77% requires interest payments totalling $347. Assume the bank has not made an election to use the market rate to calculate the value of the benefit and that FBT is paid at 49.25%. The quarterly taxable value is: $ Interest at prescribed rate  347.00  Less actual interest  301.00 46.00  The FBT payable is 49.25% of that taxable value, being:  $46 × 49.25% =  22.66  Market interest An employer who is in the business of lending money to the public can choose to calculate the FBT value of providing an employment related loan using the market interest on the loan. If an election is made, the value of the benefit is the amount by which the market interest on the loan is more than the amount of interest that accrued on the loan in that period. If the loan is a financial arrangement and it is appropriate, the value of the benefit is the amount by which the market interest on the loan exceeds the income that would have accrued to the employer calculated under the yield to maturity method. If an election is made to use the market interest, the employer is locked into that method for at least two income years, being the income year to which the election relates and for the next following income year. After this two-year period has passed, the employer may change from using the market interest only if the Commissioner is given at least one year’s notice of the intended change. The oneyear period of notice is calculated from the beginning of the income year of change. Market interest is the amount of interest calculated at the interest rate that would apply to a borrower belonging to a group of persons that satisfies certain conditions. These conditions are: ▪ a comparable credit risk to the group to which the employee belongs ▪ no association between a member of the group and the employer, and ▪ the group is of sufficient number to ensure an arm’s length transaction.  When calculating the market interest, the amount of interest is the amount accrued on the loan during the quarter or tax year calculated on the daily balance of the loan at the rate referred to above. An employer who is a member of the same group of companies as a person who is in the business of lending money to the public can use the market interest rate method of valuing an employment-related loan. With effect from 1 April 2019, a second option was added to the current “market interest” definition. Banks and other employers eligible to use the market interest rate for calculating FBT on employment-related loans may use either the current or new definition. The new definition for a given employee and loan type is the lowest rate given around the same time by their employer in the ordinary course of business to a customer with a similar profile to the employee. An employee and a customer will have similar profiles if, on the factors considered by the money lender as relevant to the interest rates it offers to customers, they have similar characteristics. Factors a money lender may consider when offering loans include, but are not limited to, a customer’s risk profile, amount of security or loan to value ratio. In calculating the market rate for a given employee, employers are generally required to use loans given to customers in the same quarter that a loan was given to the employee. However, if it is impracticable to calculate the market rate using loans given to customers in the same quarter that a loan was given to the employee, they may instead calculate the market rate using loans given to customers in the quarter immediately before the quarter in which the loan was given to the employee. Law: IT07 ss RD 34, RD 35  ¶21-400 FBT — loan record-keeping requirements Records maintained in respect of any loan must be sufficient to: ▪ establish the daily balance of the loan during each quarter, to enable the calculation of interest at the prescribed or non-  concessionary rate on that balance ▪ enable calculation of the interest that would be payable on the daily balance at the prescribed or non-concessionary rate, and ▪ enable the calculation of actual interest and charges in respect of each quarter, regardless of when the interest in fact accrues or whether any charges are in fact incurred. (This requires a system to record interest and charges on a quarterly basis for the purposes of fringe benefit tax.) Records for establishing the daily balance during each quarter should include records of the loan balance at the beginning of the quarter, all repayments or reductions to the loan during the quarter and their dates, and interest charges applicable during the quarter and their dates.  ¶21-410 FBT — shareholder-employee — current account and low-interest loan Fringe benefit tax is payable when there is a debit balance in a shareholder current account and the interest charged, if any, to the shareholder-employee is less than the interest that would be charged at the prescribed rate for the quarter or tax year in which there is a debit balance. A special rule permits the retrospective crediting of salary or wages for the purposes of calculating the value of the loan benefit. Where the shareholder-employee is allocated further salary or wages (not being subject to PAYE) after the end of the tax year, that income is treated as having been credited to the current account on the later of either the first day of that income year or the day on which the balance of the current account first became overdrawn during that income year. Law: IT07 s RD 36  ¶21-420 FBT — loans owing to life insurers  FBT is payable in respect of any low-interest loan that a life insurer may provide to a policyholder or to an associate of a policyholder where the life insurance policy is offered or entered into in New Zealand. In addition to the life insurer, s CX 11 catches an associated person of the insurer or any other person with whom the insurer has made arrangements for the granting of the loan. The FBT rules apply as if the insurer is the employer, the policyholder is the employee and the loan is an employment-related loan. Law: IT07 s CX 11  OTHER EMPLOYMENT-RELATED BENEFITS SUBJECT TO FBT ¶21-425 FBT — unclassified benefits As a catch-all category, a fringe benefit arises when an employee receives an unclassified benefit in connection with his or her employment. An unclassified benefit does not include: ▪ the availability for private use of a motor vehicle ▪ subsidised transport ▪ employment-related loans ▪ services for members of Parliament ▪ contributions to superannuation schemes ▪ contributions to sickness, accident or death benefit funds ▪ contributions to funeral trusts under s CW 45, and ▪ contributions to life or health insurance of a friendly society. An unclassified benefit includes employment-related gifts and prizes (eg flowers to an employee on the birth of a child or on a family  bereavement), free or subsidised goods, and other benefits such as the sale of property to an employee at a discount. The test goes beyond benefits related to work performed. Provided it is in connection with the employee’s employment, a benefit is taxable as a fringe benefit. The de minimis exemption may apply to fringe benefits provided in this category. See ¶21-555. Example 1: A retirement presentation is a fringe benefit by virtue of the employment (or former employment) of the employee.  Example 2: A fringe benefit does not arise when an employee is given caravan accommodation at a motor camp site in order to carry out managerial duties. See Case Q36 (1993) 15 NZTC 5,177.  Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(ii), CX 37  ¶21-430 Goods liable to FBT Free, subsidised or discounted goods provided by the employer may constitute unclassified benefits. Goods manufactured by the employer Where goods are manufactured, produced or processed by the employer, the value of the benefit is equal to the lowest arm’s length (GST-inclusive) price at which identical goods are sold by the employer to wholesalers, retailers or the general public. See ¶21638. “Discount” sales to employees of the employer’s goods will not give rise to a benefit if the amount paid by the employee does not fall below the lowest price charged on an arm’s length sale. However, sales “at cost” will give rise to a benefit if the at cost price is below the price charged to anyone at arm’s length.  Example: Sales at wholesale would not give rise to a benefit. However, where the employer bulk-discounts on an arm’s length sale, the reduced price per item on such sales could be the price charged to employees without a benefit arising even though the employees do not buy in the same bulk. It would still be, provided the goods were identical, the lowest arm’s length price.  Goods purchased or paid for by the employer The benefit of free, subsidised or discounted goods is liable for FBT if it is provided by an employer in an arm’s length transaction to an employee at less than the GST-inclusive cost to the employer. This valuation means that discount sales to employees of goods at cost will not give rise to any benefit. A retailer, for example, which permits its employees to purchase goods at a staff discount which does not fall below the cost of the goods to the employer, will not be providing any benefit. Cost to the employer, in most cases, means the purchase price of those goods to the employer. Discounted goods provided by a third party under an arrangement with an employer may be exempt from FBT. See ¶21-638. Group companies If a group company is providing the goods, that company may choose to value the benefit as if the group were one company. Commissioner may determine value of benefit Where no value for a benefit from goods can be determined on any of the bases discussed above, then the value will be market value or a value determined by the Commissioner. In this case, market value is the price normally paid, at the time when the fringe benefit is received by the employee, for the fringe benefit in a sale in the open market, freely offered, made on ordinary trade terms and to a member of the public at arm’s length. Law: IT07 ss RD 27, RD 40  ¶21-434 Services liable for FBT  The benefit of free, subsidised or discounted services is liable for FBT if the services are provided to an employee at less than normal market price to the general public, inclusive of GST. Where the services are provided to the employee by the employer and are of a type normally provided as part of the business by the employer to the public for payment, the value of the benefit is the price which the employer would customarily have charged for identical or similar services to a member of the public in ordinary arm’s length trade at the same time. Where the transaction is not at “arm’s length”, the fringe benefit value will be the value of those services to the general public. Where the amount paid by the employee for the services is not less than the normal market price to the general public, there is no liability for FBT. Where no value for a benefit from services can be determined on any of the bases discussed above, the value will be market value or a value determined by the Commissioner. Market value is the price normally paid, at the time when the fringe benefit is received by the employee, for the fringe benefit in a sale in the open market, freely offered, made on ordinary trade terms and to a member of the public at arm’s length. A person who provides services to an employee belonging to a group of employees is treated as providing the same or similar services to the public in the open market on ordinary trade or professional terms if the person provides the same or similar services to a group of persons who are comparable in number to the group of employees in question. For this treatment to apply, the services provided to the comparable group must have been negotiated on an arm’s length basis. If these conditions are satisfied, the value of the services provided to the employee will be nil. Law: IT07 ss RD 27, RD 41  ¶21-436 Employer-issued cryptoassets Inland Revenue has released a series of rulings dealing with payments made to employees in cryptoassets. BR Pub 21/01, “Income tax — salary and wages paid in crypto-assets” (which  replaced BR Pub 19/01), provides that, where an employee is paid part of their regular remuneration in cryptoassets, this is subject to PAYE and, as such, the FBT rules will not apply. BR Pub 21/02, “Income tax — bonuses paid in crypto-assets” (which replaced BR Pub 19/02), concludes the payment of an amount of cryptoassets to an employee as an incentive or bonus is also subject to the PAYE rules. See ¶3-198. However, an unclassified benefit may arise where cryptoassets issued by an employer are provided to an employee, and this is considered in BR Pub 19/03, “Income tax – employer-issued cryptoassets provided to an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 105). In particular, the ruling covers the situation where the cryptoassets are subject to the condition that the employee must remain an employee at a specified date in the future to become entitled to the cryptoassets and cannot sell or otherwise transfer the cryptoassets until the specified future date. The cryptoasset industry is still evolving and there is currently no standard terminology used. The ruling uses the term “crypto-asset” to cover digital assets that use cryptography and blockchain technology to regulate their generation and verify transfers (sometimes also referred to by other terms, including “cryptocurrencies” and “tokens”). The ruling concludes that a fringe benefit will not be provided until the conditions are met and the employee becomes entitled to the cryptoassets. For example, if transfer of the cryptoassets is subject to an employee remaining in employment for six months or meeting certain performance targets, there will be no benefit for FBT purposes until those conditions are satisfied and the employee becomes entitled to the cryptoassets. Any such fringe benefit is an unclassified benefit. The Commissioner’s view is that cryptoassets are “goods” for the purposes of the valuation methodology in s RD 40 for the situation where an employer provides an employee with “goods” the employer has produced. Where the employer is selling its cryptoassets to arm’s length buyers at the time the cryptoassets are provided to the  employee, the value of the fringe benefit will be the lowest price for which the employer was selling identical cryptoassets to arm’s length buyers in the open market in New Zealand. Where the employer is not selling the cryptoassets at the time they are provided to the employee, s RD 40 will not apply. However, if, at the time the cryptoassets are provided to the employee they can be purchased on the open market, the value of the fringe benefit is determined under s RD 27(3). The value will be the price normally paid on the open market. In any other circumstances, the Commissioner will need to determine the value of the fringe benefit. The ruling sets out how valuation should be determined in that case as follows (at para 31): “▪ Where the crypto-assets are provided to the employee before sale to the public, the employer should use the price at which the crypto-assets will first be sold to the public if such a price has been determined. For example, if the crypto-assets will initially be sold to the public as part of an ICO [Initial Coin Offering] at $1 per token, crypto-assets provided to employees before the ICO should also be valued at $1. Where the first public sale price has not yet been determined, the employer can use a value based on the last arm’s length sale price (if applicable). For example, if seed capital has been invested in return for a share of crypto-assets, a crypto-asset value could be determined from this. ▪ Where the crypto-assets are provided to the employee after the employer has ceased selling to the public but before there is an established market for the crypto-assets, the employer should use the price at which the crypto-assets were last sold to the public. ▪ If none of the above situations apply, the employer should contact Inland Revenue to discuss their particular situation.”  The commentary to the ruling also considers two similar situations where the employee is not required to meet any conditions to be entitled to the cryptoassets. Where cryptoassets are transferred to the employee without any conditions, a benefit will be provided for FBT purposes at the time of transfer. Where the cryptoassets are transferred to the employee subject to restrictions on its sale (eg the cryptoassets cannot be sold for three months), a benefit would be provided for FBT purposes at the time the employee becomes legally entitled to receive the cryptoassets (regardless of any restrictions on disposal). This is different from the situation in the ruling where the employee does not become legally entitled to the cryptoassets until certain conditions are met. This also applies if the cryptoassets are not physically provided to the employee but are held on trust for the employee until the restricted sale period is over. The ruling also contains a number of examples.  ¶21-440 Subsidised transport liable for FBT Employers who carry on a business that includes transporting the public for hire or reward (ie travel by air, bus, rail or sea passenger transport with the exclusion of motor vehicle) and who allow their employees to travel at a reduced rate, or at no cost at all, are subject to FBT. A benefit is also provided if the transport is provided by a company that is in the same group of companies as the employer and the group company is in the business of public transport. Value of benefit The value of the benefit for fringe benefit purposes is 25% of the highest amount charged by the employer to the public for transportation of the same class, extent and occasion. When transportation is provided to an employee by a third party with whom the employer has entered into an arrangement for that benefit  to be provided, the value of the benefit for FBT purposes is the greater of: ▪ 25% of the highest amount charged by the third party to the public for transportation of the same class, extent and occasion ▪ 25% of the highest amount charged by the employer to the public for transportation of the same class, extent and occasion, and ▪ the amount that the employer is liable to pay or has paid to the third party for the benefit being provided by the third party. The above amounts are determined on a GST-inclusive basis. “Class” refers to the classes of transportation available, such as first, business or economy class; “extent” refers to transportation with the same departure and destination points; and “occasion” refers to the time of carriage. If an employee makes a contribution towards the cost of the subsidised transport, the value of the benefit is reduced by that amount. Example 1: An airline employee takes an overseas holiday on his employer’s airline, travelling economy class. The highest price charged to the public for travel of the same class at that time is $650. The employee pays $200. Highest fare charged to the public for the same flight $650 25% of the highest fare (ie value of the benefit)  $162.50  Because the employee is paying more than the value of the benefit ($200 compared with $162.50) the taxable value of the benefit is nil and no FBT is payable by the employer.  Example 2: An airline employee takes an overseas holiday on an airline that has an agreement with her employer. The highest price charged to the public for travel of the same class at that time is $650. Under the agreement, the employee’s airline pays $325 to the other airline.  Highest fare charged to the public for the same flight $650 25% of the highest fare  $162.50  Price paid by the employer  $325  The price paid by the employer is greater than 25% of the highest fare. The taxable value of the benefit is $325. (If the employee pays the employer $200 as a contribution to the fare, the taxable value of the benefit is $325 − $200 = $125.)  Employer not carrying on transport business When an employer is not carrying on a public transport business, it would appear that cheap or free carriage of employees by a third party (whether a public transport operator or not) under an arrangement is not a subsidised transport benefit if the travel is to enable the employee to perform his or her employment duties. See ¶21-644. This does not apply if the third-party provider is a company in the same group of companies as the employer and the group company is in the public transport business. Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(i), CX 9, RD 33, RD 54, YA 1  ¶21-500 Unclassified benefits: records required for FBT purposes Records should be kept for gifts and prizes, subsidised or discounted goods below cost, subsidised or discounted services, and subsidised or discounted transport. In respect of each benefit, records may show: ▪ date of transaction ▪ name of employee receiving the benefit ▪ description of the benefit provided ▪ cost to employee ▪ cost to employer where goods are provided  ▪ normal market price where services are provided, and ▪ highest price charged to the general public where subsidised transport is provided. Law: TAA s 22(2)(i)  ¶21-505 FBT — frequent flyer and membership reward schemes In a bid to attract more customers, airlines and other organisations offer benefits through the membership of schemes variously known as “frequent flyer schemes”, “loyalty programmes” and “membership reward programmes”. For example, members of a frequent flyer scheme are granted points once they have travelled a predetermined number of kilometres or miles on an airline. Points can be exchanged for free travel, goods, or services, depending on the terms of the particular scheme. In some cases, employers may be exposed to an FBT liability if they become involved in negotiations or discussions with the airline or credit card company as to the amount or level of benefits provided to employees. Inland Revenue has issued a number of rulings (most of which have expired) in relation to employees participating in or receiving entitlements under reward schemes using employer-related charges or credit cards. Generally, the view expressed in these rulings is that the employer is not liable for FBT on the benefits arising to the employee in these circumstances. However, there will be an FBT liability if the employer has entered into an “arrangement” with the promoter of the scheme to benefit employees. Similarly, if any membership fee to join a programme is paid for by the employer, the fee paid will be subject to FBT (but not any entitlements received by the employee under the programme). See binding public ruling BR Pub 99/5 and binding product rulings BR Prd 00/02 and BR Prd 98/7. A product ruling has been issued for the Air New Zealand Airpoints Programme of Airpoints Dollars: see BR Prd 09/09, published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 4. This ruling applied for the period 1 April 2009 to 31 March 2014.  Law: IT07 s CX 2(2)  ¶21-510 FBT — employee’s home telephone Inland Revenue’s policy on the situation where an employer pays for an employee’s home telephone costs is as follows: ▪ If the employee is liable for the cost of the telephone, but the employer pays it, the employee is liable for income tax on any amount that the employer pays which is not an exempt reimbursing allowance under s CW 17. The employer must deduct PAYE from such amounts. ▪ If the employer is liable for the cost of the telephone, the proportion of the rental which relates to private use will be subject to FBT. This policy also applies to mobile telephones, pagers, fax machines and computer connections. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 8, April 1993 at 4. Retention of income tax records Employers must keep a schedule of employees for whom they pay the rental of a home telephone. This schedule must be kept with FBT and PAYE records and must contain: the employee’s name and address; the amount of employer contribution to telephone cost; and a statement of the employment-related use of the telephone. An exemption may apply for cellphones and laptop computers provided to employees, see ¶21-650.  ¶21-515 FBT — employer-paid child care The FBT implications of an employer either paying child care agencies directly for the care of employees’ children or of reimbursing employees for the cost of the child care are as follows:  ▪ Where an employer pays or has a liability to pay for the child care provided to an employee’s children, the employer must pay FBT on that benefit. ▪ Where the cost of the child care is paid to the employee by way of reimbursement, the amount of the reimbursement will be taxable in the hands of the employee, so the employer must deduct PAYE from the reimbursement. ▪ Where child care facilities are provided by an employer on the employer’s premises, the value of that child care is not taxable to the employee, neither is FBT payable by the employer. The provision of the facility does not come within employment income, so it is not taxable to the employee. Section CX 23 specifically exempts from FBT any benefit supplied to the employee on the employer’s premises. See ¶21-624. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 2, August 1993 at 11.  ¶21-520 Expatriate home leave travel and FBT Inland Revenue’s policy on expatriate home leave travel is that employers who are New Zealand taxpayers are liable for FBT on travel benefits provided to their expatriate employees (and/or associated persons of those employees) to enable them to take recreational leave overseas. Travel benefits are “benefits” under the definition of “fringe benefit” because they advantage expatriate employees (both directly and relative to other employees) by enabling them to take leave overseas and removing the need for them to pay for their own holiday travel. See ¶21-608 and ¶21-644 for exceptions to this rule. Travel benefits can be one of two types of fringe benefit: ▪ “subsidised transport”, which is travel provided at nil or lower than normal price by an employer or a company that is in the same group of companies as the employer, who carries on the  business of general public carriage or transportation (s CX 9 — see ¶21-440), or ▪ any unclassified benefit received by the employee when the benefit is received in connection with the employee’s employment (s CX 37 — see ¶21-510). Example: An accountant employed by the London branch of an international accounting firm is seconded to Wellington to work for its New Zealand associates for two years. The accountant, her spouse and child rent a house in Wellington and get tenants for their London house. The secondment contract with the New Zealand associate says that after nine months’ service the employee qualifies for three weeks’ annual leave and free return air travel to Great Britain for her and her family. This travel benefit does not replace a need for the employer to reimburse the accountant for transport costs she would have incurred in travelling between home and work. Her “home” is the Wellington house, not the London property. The travel relates to recreation, not “the purposes of that employment”, and costs of holiday travel are not costs she would otherwise be required to incur for the benefit or the convenience of the employer in relation to that employment. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 1, July 1993 at 7.  Law: IT07 ss CX 9, CX 37  ¶21-525 FBT and personal development courses Payments made by an employer for an employee to undertake a personal development course, as opposed to a specific work-related course, may be subject to FBT. FBT is payable if the course has more to do with the employee’s personal development than acquiring a skill to be used in his or her job. However, where there is a reasonable link between the skill to be acquired and the employee’s role in employment, no FBT liability will arise. Example 1: Adam works for ABC Ltd. Part of his job is to make presentations to clients. His employer has agreed to pay Adam’s expenses for Toastmasters so that he can  develop his public speaking skills. In this situation, there is a reasonable link to Adam’s work, therefore no FBT liability arises.  Example 2: Gretchen works as a panel-beater. She is going on holiday to Japan and has decided to learn Japanese. Her employer has agreed to pay for her foreign language course. As there is no reasonable link between the language course and the work Gretchen does, the cost of the course is subject to FBT.  The above examples are from Inland Revenue’s newsletter FBT News, Issue 4, September 2003.  ¶21-535 Life insurance premiums and FBT Only some employer contributions to life insurance are subject to fringe benefit tax (FBT). There is a fine distinction as to when an FBT liability arises. FBT is payable on insurance policy premiums where an employer takes out a policy on the life of an employee and pays the premiums. However, if the employer benefits from the policy then the payments are not subject to FBT. Before 30 March 2017, premiums paid on behalf of an employee on a life insurance policy taken out by the employer for the benefit of the employee or the employee’s spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner or child were specifically included as “expenditure on account of an employee” and, therefore, employment income. PAYE was required to be paid on those amounts, unless the policy had any of the following features: ▪ the premium could not be refunded or converted to cash by the employee or an associated person, and the only benefits payable under the policy were payable on the death or because of accident, disease or sickness of the beneficiary ▪ the premium was paid by an employer that was a close company to the extent that the expenditure was treated as a dividend  ▪ the policy was part of a superannuation category 1, 2 or 3 scheme, or ▪ the policy was held by or for the trustees of a superannuation category 3 scheme. If the policy fell into any of the above categories, then FBT had to be considered. A further consideration under the FBT rules was whether the life insurance policy was a specified insurance policy (able to be attributed to a specific employee) or an unclassified benefit. From 30 March 2017, all life insurance policies are to be treated as specified insurance premiums as opposed to unclassified benefits. Questions we’ve been asked Inland Revenue has released a number of QWBAs dealing with the income tax treatment of various insurance policies that consider the application of FBT (see also ¶21-540). QB 18/02, “Income tax — Insurance — Term life insurance policy taken out by employee with employer paying the premiums on employee’s behalf”, concludes that the amount of the premiums in that scenario is deductible to the employer and subject to PAYE for the employee. FBT will therefore not apply. QB 18/03, “Income tax — Insurance — Term life insurance policy taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee”, concludes that the amount of the premiums in that scenario is deductible to the employer and subject to FBT. They are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 24 and 26. Law: IT07 ss CE 5, CX 5(1), (2), CX 16  ¶21-540 FBT — employer superannuation, health care insurance, income protection insurance and funeral trust contributions Fringe benefit tax (FBT) is applicable in respect of employer contributions to any one of the following:  ▪ a sickness, accident or death benefit fund ▪ a funeral trust to meet employees’ funeral expenses (see ¶24134) ▪ the insurance fund of a friendly society, or ▪ a superannuation scheme. An employer-paid premium (called a specified insurance premium) under a life insurance (¶21-535) or health insurance (personal accident or sickness) policy is also classed as a fringe benefit. Any benefits of the kind referred to above are not classified as fringe benefits to the extent that they are assessable income of the employee. This ensures that employer contributions to a sickness, accident or death benefit fund approved for the purposes of the exempt income provisions, employer-paid specified insurance premiums and employer contributions to an insurance fund of a friendly society for the benefit of employees are not subject to double taxation. Employer’s superannuation cash contributions are specifically excluded from the FBT regime. See ¶21-574. Income protection insurance A full payment or contribution by the employer to an employee’s premium for income protection insurance (which is for the benefit of an employee) is not a fringe benefit if the payment of the insurance to the employee would be the employee’s assessable income. Questions we’ve been asked Inland Revenue has released a number of QWBAs dealing with the income tax treatment of various insurance policies that consider the application of FBT (see also ¶21-535). QB 17/10, “Income tax and fringe benefit tax — Insurance — Group insurance policy taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 1, February 2018 at 19), concludes that payment of the premium under most group  insurance policies (life or accident/medical or both) will be a fringe benefit as the payment of a specified insurance premium under s CX 16. In the event that a group insurance policy does not come within s CX 16, however, the item concludes it will still be an unclassified benefit under s CX 37. QB 18/04, “Income tax — Insurance — Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employee with employer paying the premiums on employee’s behalf” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 28), concludes the amount of the premiums is deductible to the employer and generally subject to PAYE. FBT will not apply because the policy belongs to the employee. It replaced QB 15/09. QB 18/05, “Income tax — Insurance — Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 32), concludes the premiums paid will be subject to FBT unless they are premiums paid for income protection insurance where the employer has a liability to pay (or contribute to) the premiums, and a pay-out under the insurance policy would be assessable income of the employee. It replaced QB 15/10. See ¶3-185 for additional discussion of these QWBAs. Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(i), CX 13–CX 16, CX 31, RD 37, RD 38  ¶21-545 Expenses of members of Parliament and FBT Any travel, accommodation and communications services paid or provided to the Prime Minister or a former Prime Minister, other Ministers of the Crown, parliamentary Under-Secretaries, or members or former members of Parliament, or to any member of their families are subject to FBT to the extent to which the services are exempt income under s CW 31 (see ¶5-598). This covers the payment of money or allowances for travel, accommodation and communications services and the provision thereof to any member of the family (including a wife, husband, partner, widow, widower, or children) of a member of Parliament as well as any other means of  meeting the travel, accommodation and communications needs or obligations of members of Parliament. A reasonable estimate may be made to determine how much of the benefit is subject to FBT. Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(i), CX 12, CX 33B  EXEMPTIONS FROM FBT ¶21-555 FBT — de minimis exemption in respect of unclassified benefits Where the value of benefits provided to an employee that come within the “unclassified benefits” category (see ¶21-425) is below a certain threshold, FBT will not apply. If the value of the benefits exceeds the threshold, FBT is payable on the total value of the benefits including any amount below the threshold. For employers paying FBT on a quarterly basis, no FBT is payable provided that: ▪ the total taxable value of unclassified benefits provided in the quarter to each employee does not exceed $300, and ▪ the total taxable value in the last four quarters, including the current quarter, of all “unclassified benefits” provided by the employer, or an associated person, to all of the employer’s employees does not exceed $22,500. For employers accounting for FBT on an annual or income-year basis, the total taxable value of unclassified benefits must not exceed: ▪ $1,200 per employee pa, and ▪ $22,500 per employer pa. Example:  TP is employed at a garage and pays $350 for tyres for his spouse. The tyres have a wholesale price of $600 and a retail price of $820. TP’s employer has provided more than $22,500 of unclassified benefits to all of its employees in the last four quarters, including the current quarter. There is no exemption from FBT as the total value of the tyres supplied to TP’s spouse exceeds the $300 per quarter FBT exemption and the employer has provided more than $22,500 of unclassified benefits to all employees in the last four quarters. Assume FBT is paid at 49.25%. The taxable value of the fringe benefit is: $ Cost to the employer less employee contribution  600 350 250  The FBT payable is $123.13 (ie 49.25% of $250).  Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(ii), CX 37, RD 45  ¶21-564 Exclusion from FBT — share purchase scheme loans The benefit to an employee from a loan made under a share purchase scheme was not included as a fringe benefit. Note that the provisions relating to “share purchase schemes” were repealed with effect from 29 March 2018 and replaced by new provisions relating to “exempt employee share schemes” (exempt ESS) (see ¶3-471). The commentary to the relevant Bill made it clear that it was intended that loans provided under an exempt ESS would continue to be subject to the automatic exemption from FBT. However, s CX 10(2)(b) has not yet been amended to refer to exempt ESS rather than share purchase schemes. Note, however, that if the loan provided under an exempt ESS satisfies the definition of an “employee share loan” (see ¶21-568), it may be excluded under s CX 10(2)(a). Law: IT07 s CX 10(2)(b)  ¶21-568 Exclusion from FBT — employee share loans An employee share loan is excluded from the definition of fringe benefit. An employee share loan meets the following criteria: ▪ the purpose of the loan must be to enable the employee (and not an associate) to acquire shares in the employer (or a company associated with the employer) ▪ the loan must be used for that purpose only ▪ the shares must be beneficially owned by the employee at all times during the currency of the loan ▪ the loan must include a condition that the employee must immediately repay the loan in full if the employee stops being the beneficial owner of the shares ▪ the company issuing the shares maintains a dividend paying policy ▪ the company issuing the shares is not a qualifying company throughout the term of the loan ▪ the employer and employee are not associated persons, and ▪ the employee share loan is not made under a share purchase scheme. An employee share loan also applies to a loan for the purchase of rights or options in the company. Law: IT07 ss CX 10(2)(a), CX 35  ¶21-574 Exclusion from FBT — superannuation cash contributions  Employer’s superannuation cash contributions are excluded from the FBT regime. Employer’s superannuation cash contributions are contributions paid in money by an employer for the benefit of their employees to a “superannuation fund” (ie a retirement scheme (within the meaning of s 6(1) of the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013), and for a retirement scheme that is a trust, the trustees of the retirement scheme) or a KiwiSaver scheme registered under the KiwiSaver Act 2006. Also excluded from the definition of fringe benefit are benefits in the form of the provision of services to a superannuation fund to the extent that those would have been allowed as a deduction if the expenditure had been incurred by the fund. Law: IT07 ss CX 13(2), CX 32, RD 65(1), YA 1  ¶21-584 Exemption from FBT — employee tax return preparation Assistance in preparing an employee’s tax return is exempt from FBT. The exemption applies to the extent that the expenditure incurred in providing the assistance would have been deductible if incurred by the employee under s DB 3 (see ¶10-920). An employee’s return includes the income information included in a prepopulated account under s 22D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Example: A company pays its tax advisers to prepare the tax returns of its senior managers. The expenditure is not subject to FBT.  Law: IT07 s CX 27  ¶21-588 FBT — charitable organisations Charitable organisations are liable for FBT to the extent that any fringe benefits provided are part of the organisation’s business  activities that are outside its benevolent, charitable, cultural or philanthropic purposes. The extent to which this applies was previously addressed in public binding ruling BR Pub 09/03. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 6, August 2009 at 12. However, in April 2017, Inland Revenue released a public binding ruling BR Pub 17/06, “Fringe Benefit Tax — Charitable and other donee organisations and fringe benefit tax” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 16), which withdrew and replaced BR Pub 09/03 with effect from 1 July 2017. Note that BR Pub 09/03 continued to apply to arrangements entered into before 1 July 2017 for a further three years. Organisations qualifying for the FBT exclusion could choose whether to apply BR Pub 17/06 to their existing arrangements, but from 1 July 2020 BR Pub 17/06 has applied to all arrangements providing fringe benefits, regardless of when they were entered into. BR Pub 17/06 clarifies that the definition of “business” in s YA 1 needs to be applied to determine whether a charitable organisation is carrying on a business. In contrast, the commentary to BR Pub 09/03 suggested a charitable organisation could not carry on a business unless profit making was one of the stated objects in its constitution. BR Pub 17/06 acknowledges that this is not correct. BR Pub 17/06 also clarifies that a qualifying charitable organisation may carry on a business activity within (or outside) its benevolent, charitable, cultural or philanthropic purposes. This possibility was not fully discussed in BR Pub 09/03. BR Pub 17/06 notes that the distinction between activities that are within, or outside of, the qualifying organisation’s benevolent, charitable, cultural, or philanthropic purposes is specific to the FBT exclusion. It is not a distinction that is relevant for income tax purposes or when determining whether an organisation is a charitable entity for the purposes of the Charities Act 2005. The ruling concludes that where benefits are received mainly in connection with employment, to the extent an employee is engaged in activities carrying out a charitable organisation’s benevolent, charitable, cultural or philanthropic purposes (including the carrying  on of a business activity), benefits provided to them will not attract FBT. However, to the extent a qualifying organisation's employee is engaged in business activities of the organisation that are not of themselves benevolent, charitable, cultural or philanthropic, any benefits provided to the employee will not fall within the exclusion provided by s CX 25, and so may attract FBT. In addition, the Commissioner now considers that the phrase “to the extent to which” in s CX 25(1) contemplates apportionment. This means where a benefit is provided mainly in connection with an employee’s employment, the benefit is subject to FBT only to the extent to which the employment is in a business activity of the charitable organisation that is outside its benevolent, charitable, cultural or philanthropic purposes. This means that some organisations may need to apportion fringe benefits where employees are engaged in business activities both within and outside the organisation’s benevolent, charitable, cultural or philanthropic purposes. This is a change in the Commissioner’s position. In BR Pub 09/03, the view was that FBT would be paid in full on any benefit provided to an employee that worked more than 50% of their time in a business outside the organisation’s charitable purposes. The ruling contains a flow diagram that summarises the approach to take to decide whether the exclusion in s CX 25 applies. Short-term charge facilities A charitable organisation will be subject to FBT on the provision to an employee of short-term charge facilities if the facilities provided to the employee in a tax year is more than the lesser of: ▪ 5% of the employee’s salary or wages, and ▪ $1,200. Briefly, a short-term charge facility is an arrangement that enables an employee of the charitable organisation to obtain goods or services that have no connection with the organisation or its operations and the liability for the payment of the goods or services obtained is  placed on the organisation. The goods or services may be obtained by way of buying, hiring or charging the cost to an account. Shortterm charge facilities include vouchers (for example, supermarket vouchers). A short-term charge facility does not include an employment-related loan (see ¶21-340). For a charitable organisation that pays FBT on a quarterly basis, the 5% threshold is determined from the beginning of the tax year to the end of the quarter (the measurement period). There is no FBT payable if the total value of short-term charge facilities provided to the employee in the measurement period is less than 5% of the employee’s salary or wages for the tax year. As soon as the threshold is exceeded, FBT is payable on the total amount of the facilities provided in the measurement period and in each quarter thereafter (assuming the threshold continues to be met). Value of benefit The value of the benefit of providing a short-term charge facility is calculated by adding all of the following items: ▪ the amount paid by the organisation for or towards the purchase or hire of the goods and services obtained under the short-term charge facility ▪ interest incurred on the purchase or hire of the goods and services, and ▪ if the facility is a credit card or charge card provided for the employee’s use solely for purposes that are not connected with the organisation or its operations, account or service fees on the card. Law: IT07 ss CX 25(1), YA 1  ¶21-594 Exclusion from FBT — employees of nonresident employers  Excluded from the definition of fringe benefit are benefits received by an employee who receives PAYE income payments that are not assessable in New Zealand in that FBT period. When a non-resident employee works in New Zealand for a non-resident employer, the employee’s PAYE income payments may be exempt in New Zealand under the Act or under provisions of a double tax agreement. The exclusion from FBT is intended to address this situation so that any non-monetary benefits provided to such employees are not subject to FBT. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 6, December 1995 at 8. Law: IT07 s CX 26  ¶21-604 Exclusion from FBT — assessable income Any benefit provided in connection with an employee’s employment which is otherwise included in the assessable income of the employee concerned is not a benefit for FBT purposes. For example, an accommodation allowance included as employment income (see ¶5-051 and ¶5-290) is excluded as a fringe benefit. Law: IT07 s CX 4  ¶21-608 Exclusion from FBT — exempt allowances A benefit is not a fringe benefit to the extent to which it is exempt income. A benefit provided to an employee in connection with the employee’s employment is also not a fringe benefit to the extent to which it removes the need that would otherwise exist for the employer to pay the employee an allowance of one of the following kinds: ▪ a reimbursing allowance that would have been exempt income under s CW 17 (see ¶3-435), unless paid to enable the employee to provide a benefit to another person ▪ a reimbursing allowance for additional travel costs attributable to one or more of the factors in s CW 18(3) (see ¶3-445)  ▪ an amount that would have been exempt income under s CW 17B (Relocation payments) (see ¶3-446) ▪ an amount that would have been exempt income under ss CW 16B to CW 16F, CW 17CB and CW 17CC (which relate to certain expenditure of an employer on an employee’s accommodation, work-related meals and clothing) (see ¶3-425, ¶3-430 and ¶3-448). In addition, a benefit is not a fringe benefit if it: ▪ is in substitution for an allowance described in the second bullet point above ▪ is brought about because the employee has a temporary change in workplace ▪ reimburses the employee for transport costs that would have been incurred for travel for one or more of the employee’s spouse, civil union or de facto partner and relatives to visit the employee at the temporary workplace, and ▪ has a value not exceeding the amount that would be provided under the allowance. Law: IT07 ss CX 5(1), (2), CX 19  ¶21-618 Value of accommodation not a fringe benefit The value of any accommodation an employer provides to an employee in connection with their employment or services is not a fringe benefit. Accommodation is defined as including the use of a house or living premises, or the use of part of a house or living premises, whether permanent or temporary. Law: IT07 ss CE 1(2), CX 28, YA 1  ¶21-620 Transport in heavy goods vehicle not a fringe benefit  Transport of an employee in a heavy goods vehicle is not a fringe benefit (for example, an employee of a removal company picked up from home on the way to the first removal task of the day). This rule applies to transport provided to an employee in a vehicle that is not a motor vehicle (as defined, see ¶21-170) and is not designed principally for the carriage of passengers. Law: IT07 s CX 19B  ¶21-624 Exemption from FBT — benefit provided on employer’s premises An employer who provides a benefit to employees that is used or consumed on the employer’s premises is not liable to FBT on those benefits. This FBT exemption does not apply to free, discounted or subsidised travel, accommodation or clothing. Employers providing a benefit to employees on the employer’s premises may be able to deduct only 50% of their expenditure. See ¶10-402. Example: A light lunch provided at a team meeting held on the employer’s premises will be exempt from FBT and fully deductible.  The exemption from FBT for benefits provided on an employer’s premises include: ▪ benefits provided by the employer that are used or consumed on the premises of a company that is in the same group of companies as the employer, and ▪ benefits provided by a company that is in the same group of companies as the employer (the benefits can be used or consumed by the employee on the premises of the employer or company providing the benefit). For the purposes of this exemption, “premises” includes premises that are owned or leased and premises on which an employee is  required to perform employment duties. Specifically excluded are premises occupied by an employee for residential purposes. Law: IT07 s CX 23  ¶21-626 FBT — car parks provided to employees The provision of a car park by an employer for an employee is usually regarded as a fringe benefit if the employee is able to park a vehicle while at work. However, a fringe benefit will not arise where the car park is part of the employer’s premises. In November 2015, the Commissioner released public rulings, BR Pub 15/11, “Fringe benefit tax — exclusion for car parks provided on employer’s premises” and BR Pub 15/12, “FBT — Exclusion for car parks provided on the premises of a company that is part of the same group of companies as an employer” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 12). These rulings produce a different FBT outcome from an older ruling. The FBT outcome set out in the new rulings is more favourable for employers because the on-premises exemption applies to a wider range of car parking arrangements than previously. Under BR Pub 15/11 and BR Pub 15/12, car parks owned or leased by employers at common law continue to qualify for the “onpremises” exemption. Other car parks that an employer has substantially exclusive use of, in fact or effect, will also qualify for the exemption under the rulings — regardless of the legal form of the car parking arrangement. This means a benefit arising from the use of some (but not all) licensed car parks may now be excluded from FBT. This change is a result of the rewriting of the income tax legislation and subsequent legislative changes affecting the onpremises FBT exclusion. The rulings apply indefinitely from 17 November 2015. The Commissioner’s view has changed, so she has also issued an operational position on FBT and car parks stating that because IR considers the legal analysis contained in BR Pub 15/11 and BR Pub  15/12 represents the correct view of the law, employers can ask IR to apply the analysis to tax positions taken in earlier years (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 34). The Commissioner will apply the principles set out in the Standard Practice Statement on s 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to determine whether to amend past assessments subject to the statutory time limits for refunds (usually four years). The following table contains some examples of different car parking arrangements and whether FBT will apply to them. Car parking arrangement  Subject to FBT?  Car park is provided on land that the employer No — exemption owns (whether or not the employer carries on applies business on or near that land). Car park is provided on land that the employer No — exemption leases (under a written and enforceable applies lease). Car park is provided on car spaces leased by the employer and the employer has a right that is substantially exclusive to use the car park.  No — exemption applies  Car park is provided in a commercial car park. No — exemption Employer is allocated reserved car spaces applies under the agreement. Employer has the right to request unauthorised vehicles to be removed from its reserved car spaces. Employer enters into a license agreement with No — exemption a commercial car park operator. Car park is applies provided on an entire floor of car park that is reserved for employer’s employees (signage is put up to enforce this). Employer enters into a lease agreement with a commercial car park operator. No spaces  Yes — exemption does not apply  are specifically allocated but employer has the right to use an area reserved for the employer and other businesses. Employer does not have the right to request that unauthorised vehicles be removed. Employer pays for parking permits to an open air car park. These are displayed in the windscreen. There are no allocated car park spaces and the car park is open to the public to park in on an hourly fee basis.  Yes — exemption does not apply  Law: IT07 s CX 23  ¶21-628 FBT exemption — health or safety A benefit provided in respect of an employee’s health or safety is exempt from FBT. For this particular exemption to apply, the benefit must: ▪ relate to the employee’s health and safety ▪ be “aimed at managing risks to health and safety in the workplace as provided under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015”, and ▪ be a benefit that would be excluded under s CX 23 if it was provided on the employer’s premises. The Commissioner considers that a benefit that targets or addresses a specific harm, hazard or risk to health and safety would meet the requirement that the benefit “is aimed at managing risks to health and safety in the workplace”. For example, a programme that specifically targets and manages stress would be considered FBT exempt. However, a gym membership that can be used at the employee’s discretion would not qualify for the exemption because a gym membership benefits the overall health of a person and does not target a specific risk to health and safety in the workplace.  Whether a benefit is provided to manage health or safety in the workplace is a highly factual exercise. It is based on the employer’s subjective assessment and identification of the actual or potential risks in that workplace. Law: IT07 s CX 24  ¶21-634 FBT exemption — employer-provided clothing Employer-provided “distinctive work clothing” is not subject to FBT, provided the clothing identifies the employer and is worn by employees in the course of or as an incidence of their employment and would not normally be worn for private purposes. Example: Alexa works as a retail assistant at a well-known women’s clothing shop that is part of a national chain. Every season, she receives an item of clothing from her employer that is sold in the shop. The provision of the free clothing will attract FBT. This is because the clothing is generic and does not qualify as distinctive work clothing that is worn as part of a uniform identifiable with the employer.  Law: IT07 s CX 30  ¶21-638 Goods not liable to FBT There is no FBT liability on “discount” disposals to employees of goods that are effectively supplied at cost price. For example, a retailer who permits its employees to purchase goods at a staff discount that does not fall below the cost of the goods to the employer will not be providing any benefit. “Cost” means the GSTinclusive cost of the goods to a registered person that can claim an input tax credit for the goods. Where the cost value of the goods is more than the retail price offered to the general public, a lower value is given. For example, where a retailer is having a clearance sale to clear old stock and reduces the price of goods for ordinary customers to below cost, the value is taken as the retail price charged, rather than the cost of the goods to the employer. Exemptions A fringe benefit will exist if goods are disposed of to employees at less than the price they cost the employer. There are two exemptions for goods that do not normally sell for more than $200. The first relates to goods “on special”. This exemption applies so long as the sale price to the employee is greater than the lesser of: ▪ 95% of the cost to the employer, or ▪ 95% of the special price available to the public. Inland Revenue must also be satisfied that at the time of disposal of the special goods to the employee, a reasonable quantity of identical goods was available for purchase by members of the public. Example 1: Cut Price Books allows employees a 5% discount on the store’s selling price of any book (including books on sale). An employee purchases a book which is in store and on special at a price below cost. The employee obtains a further 5% discount. No  fringe benefit arises because the price paid by the employee is not less than 95% of the price at which identical goods were available to the public.  Example from A Dickeson and R Thompson Fringe Benefits — A Practical Guide to Managing Your Tax Costs (5th ed) at ¶7.7. The second exemption applies where goods are being disposed of to an employee for less than cost and are so priced as a result of the staff discount (of not more than 5% off the usual selling price). Example 2: Cookie Monster Ltd makes bulk batches of cookies for a cost of $20. The retail price is $30 but they are sold to staff for $19. As the staff discount of $1 is not more than 5% of $30 (ie $1.50), FBT will not be imposed.  Example 3: Trixie-Belle Fashions Ltd makes leather miniskirts for a cost of $50. The retail price is $100 but they are sold to staff for $40. As the staff discount of $10 is greater than 5% of $100 (ie $5), there is a benefit of $10 subject to FBT.  It should be noted that the “de minimis” exemption under s RD 45 applies to most goods supplied by employers to employees. See ¶21-555. The exemption sets a threshold of $300 per quarter on benefits to an employee and $22,500 on benefits to all employees in the last four quarters, including the current quarter. Exemptions are available where the goods in question are acquired not from the employer, but from another company which is part of the same group of companies as the employer. For the purpose of the exemptions, that other company is deemed to be the employer. Discounted goods provided by third parties There is an exemption for discounted goods provided by a person who is not associated with the employer. For this exemption to apply, the discount offered to the employee is compared to the discount that would be offered to a separate group of employees, excluding  the employee group in question (the comparable group). The discount offered to the comparable group must be one that has been negotiated on an arm’s length basis. The comparable group must be comparable in number to the group of employees to whom the discount is offered, excluding the employee group in question. Also, the discount offered to the employee group in question must be the same or less than the discount offered to a comparable group. Law: IT07 ss CX 33, RD 40, RD 42–RD 44  ¶21-644 FBT — accommodation and travel in course of employment Fringe benefit tax is reduced to nil if the fringe benefit results from expenditure incurred by the employer for business-related accommodation or transport provided to an employee to enable the employee to perform his or her duties. The concession is subject to the condition that the expenditure does not relate to the provision or taking of any leave or vacation and that the expenditure is not increased as a result of the benefit. If no holiday or vacation is taken during a trip, the concession applies so that incidental benefits from the trip, which do not increase the employer’s expenditure, have a nil value for fringe benefit tax purposes. Operational statement on employer-provided travel In December 2019, Inland Revenue released operational statement OS 19/05, “Employer-provided travel from home to a distant workplace – income tax (PAYE) and fringe benefit tax” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 84), which clarifies and simplifies the tax rules around employer-provided travel to distant workplaces. Payments made by an employer in relation to a private expense of an employee are usually subject to tax. The cost of home-to-work travel is generally private expenditure as it is incurred so an employee can get to work. As this expenditure is usually private, if  the employer provides the employee’s travel from home to work the starting point is that it is taxable. However, some travel from home to work is not taxable because the expenditure relates to travel that is “on work”. This means not all employer-provided travel from an employee’s home to work is taxable, and an employer who provides travel from home to a distant workplace must consider whether that travel is subject to tax. When an employer physically provides the travel or pays for it directly, then that travel may be subject to FBT, which the employer must pay. If the employee is provided with an allowance or is reimbursed in relation to the cost of the travel, then the employer may have to deduct and pay PAYE in relation to that payment. The operational statement considers the question of whether hometo-work travel is taxable and is discussed in detail at ¶10-710. See also the discussion of the FBT aspects of interpretation statement, IS3448, “Travel by Motor Vehicle Between Home and Work — Deductibility of Expenditure and FBT Implications”, at ¶21-175. Law: IT07 s CX 20  ¶21-650 Exemption from FBT — business tools The private use or the availability for private use of a business tool provided to an employee may be exempt from FBT. The exemption applies if the business tool is provided mainly for business use. Also, the cost of the business tool to the employer must be no more than $5,000 (incl GST). The exemption may apply to a business tool that is taken to and used away from the employer’s premises, provided the employee performs a significant part of the employee’s employment duties away from the employer’s premises. A “business tool” is defined as an item that is used by an employee in the performance of the employee’s work duties and in the absence of this exemption, would be an unclassified benefit. Law: IT07 ss CX 21, YA 1  PROVISIONAL TAX Background to provisional tax  ¶22-010  Due Date for Payment of Provisional Tax ¶22-012 Calculation of Provisional Tax Payable  ¶22-070  Use of Money Interest  ¶22-350  ¶22-010 Background to provisional tax The concept of provisional tax is based on payments of tax being made while income is still being derived by a taxpayer. Effectively, this amounts to progress payments of tax being made by the taxpayer to Inland Revenue before the final assessment of tax for a particular year is made. The system will affect most taxpayers who derive income other than income from PAYE income payments (wages and salary), resident passive income or non-resident passive income. Generally, the liability to pay provisional tax is determined by calculating the taxpayer’s provisional income, which is based on the taxpayer’s income tax liability from the previous year. Taxpayers are required to pay provisional tax when their residual income tax for the previous tax year exceeds $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500). See s RC 3. Provisional tax may also be paid on a voluntary basis under s RC 4. Provisional tax can be calculated using the standard (uplift) method, the estimation method or the GST ratio method or, with effect from 1 April 2018, for the 2018–19 and later income years, the accounting income method. See further at ¶22-070, ¶22-075, ¶22-082, ¶22-090 and ¶22-105. Provisional tax is payable in instalments. Provisional taxpayers furnish returns of income at the end of the current year and are then subject to an assessment of income tax. The provisional tax paid is credited against the tax assessed, which will either result in a refund of tax already paid or in a further tax liability. Law: IT07 subpart RC  DUE DATE FOR PAYMENT OF PROVISIONAL TAX ¶22-012 Due date for payment of provisional and terminal tax 2018–19 and later income years For the 2018–19 and later income years, the due dates for the payment of provisional and terminal tax instalments are set out in the table below (from sch 3), which includes instalment dates for taxpayers who adopt the accounting income method (AIM) (see ¶22090). Provisional tax is due on the 28th day of the month specified, except for the amounts that would normally be due on 28 December and 28 April, which are due on 15 January and 7 May, respectively, to take into account the Christmas and Easter holiday periods.  With the exception of the final instalment (column F or F1) or, in the case of an AIM taxpayer with a one-month taxable period, the final two instalments (columns F and F1), all instalments of provisional tax are due before the entity’s balance date (although note that the exception for two instalments also applies to an AIM taxpayer with an April balance date whose penultimate instalment is due on 7 May). The final instalment, or two instalments, as relevant, of provisional tax are due in the months after balance date. Terminal tax is due in the 11th month following balance date for balance dates between October and March. For balance dates between April and September, terminal tax is due in the month of February following the balance date — refer to column G in the table below. Where taxpayers are linked to a tax agent who have an extension of time arrangement, the due date for terminal tax is extended by two months (refer to column H). The number of provisional tax instalments depends on which provisional tax method is used and, if the taxpayer is registered for GST, the GST filing frequency. See ¶22-115. The relevant columns in the table below for instalment dates for taxpayers using particular methods, based on their balance dates, are as follows: ▪ standard and estimation methods and either not registered for GST or GST-registered with a one- or two-month taxable period — B, D and F ▪ standard and estimation methods and GST-registered with six-month taxable period — C and F ▪ GST ratio method — A, B, C, D, E and F ▪ AIM and either not registered for GST or GST-registered with a six-month taxable period — A, B, C, D, E and F ▪ AIM and GST-registered with a two-month taxable period — either A, B, C, D, E and F or A1, B1, C1, D1, E1 and F1 (whichever corresponds with the due dates for their GST returns), and ▪ AIM and GST-registered with a one-month taxable period — A, A1, B, B1, C, C1, D, D1, E, E1, F and F1. For further discussion of the relevant instalment dates for particular provisional taxpayers, including those with an initial provisional tax liability and those who change methods, see ¶22-115. For individual tables of instalment dates for each type of provisional taxpayer set out above, see ¶50-020. SCHEDULE 3 ss EF 3, RA 13, RA 14, RC 1, RC 9, RC 10B, RC 21, RC 25, RM 24, YA 1 PAYMENT OF PROVISIONAL AND TERMINAL TAX  Part A — Dates for payment of provisional tax and terminal tax  Month of balance date October  A  A1  B  B1  C  C1  D  28 28 28 7 28 28 28 Jan Feb Mar May May Jun Jul  November 28 28 7 28 28 28 Feb Mar May May Jun Jul December 28 7 28 28 28 Mar May May Jun Jul  D1 E  E1  F  F1  G  H  28 28 28 28 15 Sep Nov Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan  28 28 28 28 15 28 Oct Dec Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan  28 28 28 28 15 28 28 Nov Jan Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb  January  7 28 28 28 May May Jun Jul  28 28 28 28 15 28 28 28 Dec Feb Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar  February  28 28 28 May Jun Jul  March  28 28 Jun Jul  April  28 Jul  May  28 28 28 28 15 28 28 28 7 28 28 28 Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May May Jun Jul  June  28 28 28 15 28 28 28 7 28 28 28 Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May May Jun Jul  July  28 28 15 28 28 28 7 28 28 28 Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May May Jun Jul  August  28 15 28 28 28 7 28 28 28 Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May May Jun Jul  28 28 28 28 15 28 28 28 7 Jan Mar Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May  28 28 28 28 15 28 28 28 7 28 Feb Apr Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May May  28 28 28 28 15 28 28 28 7 28 28 Feb Apr Aug Sep Oct Nov Jan Jan Feb Mar May May Jun  September 15 28 28 28 7 28 28 28 Jan Jan Feb Mar May May Jun Jul  Feb Apr  28 Feb Apr Aug  28 28 Feb Apr Aug Sep  28 28 28 Feb Apr Aug Sep Oct  28 28 28 28 Feb Apr Aug Sep Oct Nov  For the purposes of this schedule, balance date, in relation to provisional tax or terminal tax payable by a person for a tax year to which an income year corresponds, means— (a) if neither of paragraphs (b) and (c) apply, the person’s annual balance date for their accounts for the income year: (b) if the person has an income year that coincides with the tax year or is not required to provide a return of income for the tax year, 31 March: (c) if the person is a non-resident company that does not have a fixed establishment in New Zealand, 31 March. Law: IT07 sch 3  ¶22-013 Due dates for payment of provisional tax in a transitional year  Section YA 1 defines “transitional year” in relation to provisional tax as meaning the period for which a person files a return under s 39 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). In most cases a transitional year will mean a tax year that is not equal to 12 months due to a change in balance date for the taxpayer. Interim instalments of provisional tax are due on the 28th day of the months set out in the table below (from sch 3) except for 15 January and 7 May that replace 28 December and 28 April, respectively. The last instalment is due on the 28th of the month following the last month in the taxpayer’s transitional year. An exception exists where the last month is November or March, in which case the due date will be 15 January or 7 May, respectively. Part B — Months for payment under ss RC 9 and RC 22 to RC 25  Monthly and 2-monthly non-ratio and non-GST provisional taxpayers Transitional year length  New instalment months  0–4 mths  1  month following final month  5–8 mths  2  5th month, month following final month  9–12 mths  3  5th, 9th months, month following final month  13–16 mths  4  5th, 9th, 13th months, month following final month  17–20 mths  5  5th, 9th, 13th, 17th months, month following final month  21–24 mths  6  5th, 9th, 13th, 17th, 21st months, month following final month  6-monthly non-ratio provisional taxpayers Transitional year length  New instalment months  0–6 mths  1  month following final month  7–12 mths  2  7th month, month following final month  13–18 mths  3  7th, 13th months, month following final month  19–24 mths  4  7th, 13th, 19th months, month following final month  GST ratio provisional taxpayers Transitional year length  New instalment months  0–2 mths  1  month following final month  3–4 mths  2  3rd month, month following final month  5–6 mths  3  3rd, 5th months, month following final month  Transitional year length  New instalment months  7–8 mths  4  3rd, 5th, 7th months, month following final month  9–10 mths  5  3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th months, month following final month  11–12 mths  6  3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th months, month following final month  13–14 mths  7  3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th months, month following final month  15–16 mths  8  3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th, 15th months, month following final month  17–18 mths  9  3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th, 15th, 17th months, month following final month  19–20 mths  10 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th, 15th, 17th, 19th months, month following final month  21–22 mths  11 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th, 15th, 17th, 19th, 21st months, month following final month  23–24 mths  12 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th, 15th, 17th, 19th, 21st, 23rd months, month following final month  For the purposes of counting months under this schedule, the number of months in a transitional year is calculated as follows: ▪ The first month in a person’s transitional year is the first whole month in the transitional year. ▪ The final month in a person’s transitional year is the month in which their new balance date under s 39 of the TAA occurs. ▪ Each month falling between the first and final months must be included in determining the length of the transitional year. See s RC 21(5). Law: IT07 ss RC 21, YA 1, sch 3  ¶22-040 Liability to pay provisional tax A person will be liable to pay provisional tax if they have residual income tax (RIT) (see ¶22-060) of more than $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500), or they choose to pay provisional tax under s RC 4. See ¶22-048. The RIT threshold was increased to $5,000 from 1 April 2020 for the 2020–21 and later income years as part of the Coalition Government’s package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus. The increase in the threshold mean less businesses will need to front the cash to meet their provisional tax obligations. In accordance with s RC 3(2) the following persons do not pay provisional tax: ▪ a non-resident company that does not have a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ a multi-rate portfolio investment entity (PIE) that does not make an election under s HM 44 to pay provisional tax  ▪ before 1 April 2019, a non-filing taxpayer within the terms of former s 33AA(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994, or ▪ a non-resident contractor who has not been given an exemption relating to deductions of withholding tax. A person is not required to pay provisional tax so long as their previous year’s RIT is $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less), see s RC 3(3). However, if the taxpayer’s RIT for the current tax year is more than $5,000 (for the 2019– 20 and earlier years, $2,500) and no provisional tax has been paid (because the previous year’s RIT was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less)), the taxpayer should be aware of the potential application of the use of money interest provisions from the first instalment date unless they qualify for one of the interest concessions; see further at ¶22-115 for new provisional taxpayers and at ¶22-352. Even if a taxpayer is not required to pay provisional tax, the taxpayer may still elect to do so. See ¶22-048. In April 2019, Inland Revenue released QB 19/03, “Provisional tax — impact on employees who receive one-off amounts of income without tax deducted” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 5, June 2019 at 10). (Note that the discussion in QB 19/03 refers to the previous RIT threshold of $2,500 applying at that time. As discussed above, this figure has been increased to $5,000 with effect from the 2020–21 year. However, the analysis in the QWBA remains the same.) QB 19/03 considers the requirement to pay provisional tax and the implications for use of money interest where a person receives a one-off amount of income and their RIT exceeds $2,500. The item confirms that although the person will become a provisional taxpayer, there is no requirement to pay provisional tax in that year if the previous year’s RIT was less than $2,500. However, if the person’s RIT for the year is $60,000 or more they will be exposed to interest if they do not pay all their RIT by the third instalment date. If their RIT is less than $60,000, they must pay their RIT by terminal tax date to avoid interest. In the year following receipt, however, they will be a provisional taxpayer and obliged to pay provisional tax. If their tax position is automatically calculated, they will be advised to pay provisional tax on instalment dates based on the standard method, unless they elect to use the estimation method. If they file a return, they must choose a method when they file their return and pay instalments accordingly. If they do not expect to receive any further income of this nature in the subsequent year, they may choose to estimate their provisional tax at nil and make no instalments. It must be noted that this will expose them to interest on any shortfall at each instalment date. The QWBA contains a flowchart and examples to illustrate these points. Law: IT07 s RC 3; TAA s 120KE  ¶22-048 Election to be a provisional taxpayer A taxpayer who is not otherwise required to pay provisional tax may elect to become a provisional taxpayer. Taxpayers are eligible to make such an election if they pay provisional tax of more than $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500) on or before the date of instalment F (sch 3), or, if the taxpayer is in a transitional year, on or before the final instalment date,  and had (on the day that the first payment is made) a reasonable expectation of being a provisional taxpayer for that year. The election is made in the annual tax return for the tax year to which the election relates. This provision does not apply to taxpayers described in s RC 3(2) (discussed in ¶22-040). Law: IT07 s RC 4  ¶22-055 Life insurance business and provisional tax Taxpayers in the business of providing life insurance who are liable for income tax under the life insurance rules must provide details of provisional tax calculations. The life insurer must state the provisional tax referable to its policyholder base. The statement should be provided at the time of the first instalment date. Law: IT07 s RC 5(8)  ¶22-060 Residual income tax Residual income tax is used to calculate the amount of provisional tax a taxpayer is required to pay. Residual income tax, for a person and a tax year, is defined as the positive amount (if any) that remains after subtracting from the person’s income tax liability for the tax year, the following amounts: ▪ credits allowed against the income tax liability under: □ s LB 1 — for PAYE income payments □ s LB 3 — for resident withholding tax □ s LB 5 — for non-resident withholding tax □ s LB 6 — for retirement scheme contribution tax □ s LB 6B — for residential land withholding tax □ s LC 13 — for independent earners □ s LE 1 — for imputation credits □ s LJ 2 — for foreign income tax □ s LK 1 — relating to attributed CFC income □ s LK 6 — relating to use of tax credits by group companies □ s LO 1 — for Māori authority credits □ s LY 1 — for R&D tax credits ▪ tax credits for a supplementary dividend paid under subpart LP (excluding excess credits carried back or set off between wholly-owned group companies under s LP 3(3))  ▪ an adjustment under s HM 36B in relation to the PIE schedular income of an individual investor in a multi-rate PIE arising from income attributed to them by the PIE ▪ tax paid by a trustee for a beneficiary or by an agent for a principal. When calculating residual income tax for an income year no deduction is made (at this point) for any provisional tax payments made during that year. Law: IT07 s YA 1  CALCULATION OF PROVISIONAL TAX PAYABLE ¶22-070 Methods of calculating provisional tax payable Subpart RC contains four methods a provisional taxpayer may use to calculate the amount of provisional tax payable for an income year: ▪ the standard (uplift) method (see ss RC 5(2), (3), RC 6 and ¶22-075) ▪ an estimate of RIT on or before the due date of an instalment (see ss RC 5(5), RC 7 and ¶22-082) ▪ the use of the taxpayer’s GST ratio (see ss RC 5(6), RC 8 and ¶22-105) ▪ the accounting income method (ss RC 5(5B), (5C), RC 7B and ¶22-090). Additionally, the Commissioner may also determine the amount of provisional tax that a taxpayer should pay under the circumstances set out in accordance with a determination issued by the Commissioner under s 119 of the Tax Administration Act 1994: see s RC 5(7) and ¶22-110. Law: IT07 ss RA 4, RC 5, RC 7, RC 7B, RC 8  ¶22-075 Standard (uplift) method for provisional tax The standard calculation method is the default calculation method but it cannot be used if another method is adopted. It applies if other prescribed methods do not, although it is overridden if another method is selected. Under the standard method, the amount of provisional tax payable for a tax year is: ▪ 105% of the previous tax year’s residual income tax (RIT), or ▪ for taxpayers who have not yet furnished their preceding tax year’s tax return due to an extension of time arrangement, 110% of the RIT of the tax year before the preceding tax year. Residual income tax generally Residual income tax (RIT) for a tax year is based on: ▪ the taxpayer’s assessment for the preceding tax year, unless the Commissioner has issued a notice of assessment for the tax year at least 30 days before the relevant  instalment date, in which case it is based on the Commissioner’s assessment for the preceding tax year: see s RC 6(2) ▪ the Commissioner’s assessment for the preceding tax year, whenever the assessment is made, if the taxpayer has failed to file a return by the due date or has been allowed an extension of time for filing under ss 33 and 37 of the Tax Administration Act 1994: see s RC 6(3), and ▪ the amount of RIT (if any) for the immediately preceding tax year, if the taxpayer is not required to provide a return of income for the preceding tax year or the taxpayer’s RIT for the tax year before the preceding tax year was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less) and the taxpayer was not required to provide and has not provided a return of income for the tax year by the date of instalment F of sch 3 for the corresponding income year: see s RC 6(4). Any increase in RIT resulting from an assessment of a taxpayer’s tax liability after the due date for payment of the tax is ignored for provisional tax purposes: see s RC 6(5). The standard method is not available if any of the other methods are adopted, ie an estimate has been filed, the GST ratio method or accounting income method has been chosen, or the Commissioner has determined the amount of provisional tax payable. The amount of provisional tax payable for a year calculated under the uplift method in s RC 5(2) or (3) is truncated to whole dollars, eg $10.98 to $10. Calculation of instalments Where the standard method is used, s RC 10 provides that the amount of an instalment of provisional tax for a tax year is calculated using the following formula: (residual income tax × instalment number ÷ total instalments) − provisional tax where: residual income tax is 105% of the taxpayer’s RIT for the preceding tax year or 110% of the taxpayer’s RIT for the tax year immediately before the preceding tax year or the amount estimated by the taxpayer instalment number is the number of the taxpayer’s instalment for the year (eg 1, 2 or 3) total instalments is the total number of the taxpayer’s instalments for the tax year (eg 1, 2 or 3) provisional tax is the amount of the taxpayer’s provisional tax liabilities for the tax year to date. If a change occurs to the balance date or cycle of taxable periods of a provisional taxpayer, the calculation of the amount of an instalment is made by applying the updated figures to the items in the formula. See s RC 10(4). With effect from 1 April 2019, for the 2019–20 and later income years, s RC 10(5) and (6) allow provisional taxpayers who use the standard method to pay provisional tax to pay an amount lower than the standard method obligation on the final instalment date without having to change to the estimation method. This has reduced compliance costs for  taxpayers. However, in practical terms, it did not affect taxpayers as they have continued to do as they have always done, only the method in which they do that has altered. Section RC 10(5) provides that a person using the standard method may use the following formula to calculate their final instalment if their expected RIT is $60,000 or more: expected RIT – tax where: expected RIT is the person’s expectation of their RIT for the tax year tax is the amount of the person’s provisional tax liabilities for the tax year to date. Note that provisional tax instalments calculated under s RC 10 are also truncated to whole dollars, eg $10.98 to $10. Law: IT07 ss RC 5(2)–(4), RC 6, RC 10, YA 1  ¶22-080 Determining residual income tax following a transitional year Special rules apply for taxpayers whose previous year has been a transitional year. Because provisional tax is calculated on the basis of the previous year’s residual income tax (RIT) an adjustment is required to effectively gross up or scale down RIT for the transitional year, until it represents the RIT that would have been applied had that transitional year been of a standard length, see s RC 20(2). The amount of RIT for the transitional year must be increased or decreased by the amount given by the formula set out in s RC 20(3): residual income tax × days in current tax year ÷ days in transitional year where: residual income tax is 105% of the taxpayer’s RIT for the preceding tax year or 110% of the taxpayer’s RIT for the tax year immediately before the preceding tax year or the amount estimated by the taxpayer days in current tax year is the number of days in the current tax year, and days in transitional year is the number of days in the person’s transitional year. The taxpayer must continue to use the existing instalment dates (that applied before the change of balance date was approved) up until the new balance date is reached. See s RC 25(2). Note that residual income tax calculated under s RC 20 is truncated to whole dollars, eg $10.98 to $10. Law: IT07 s RC 20  ¶22-082 Estimated provisional tax On or before an instalment date of provisional tax, a taxpayer may make a fair and reasonable estimate or revised estimate of the taxpayer’s residual income tax (RIT) for the  income tax year and furnish a statement to Inland Revenue (IR) detailing the amount estimated. When making such an estimate, a taxpayer is required to take reasonable care and must revise the estimate for the tax year if, at some time in the tax year, the amount estimated is no longer fair and reasonable. A taxpayer is deemed to have taken reasonable care in making the estimate if the estimate is more than the provisional tax payable. See s RC 7(5). If an estimate is made in a tax year in which the taxpayer’s balance date has changed, the taxpayer must estimate the RIT as if no change in balance date will be approved and make a re-estimate after approval is received. The benefit of estimating provisional tax is that taxpayers can avoid paying too much provisional tax. This situation may occur when the taxpayer’s income for a particular year is less than the previous year. Provisional taxpayers with RIT over $60,000 may minimise their exposure to use of money interest by estimating or over-estimating their provisional tax. However, those taxpayers who have RIT under $60,000 may prefer not to estimate as they will be liable for use of money interest on any shortfall. Additionally, provisional taxpayers who estimate may be liable to shortfall penalties if reasonable care is not taken when formulating their estimation. If a taxpayer discontinues using the GST ratio method before the first provisional tax instalment date, they can elect to use the standard or estimation method of calculating provisional tax. However, if a taxpayer discontinues using the GST ratio method after the first provisional tax instalment date, the taxpayer is required to estimate his or her provisional tax payments for the remainder of the year. For this purpose the taxpayer may provide the estimate in writing or by telephone. See s RC 18(4) and (5) and ¶22-105. The calculation of the amount of instalments under the estimation method is the same as under the standard method. See ¶22-075 and s RC 10. Interest is payable or receivable on any provisional tax paid that is under- or overestimated — see ¶22-352. Law: IT07 ss RC 5(5), RC 7  ¶22-083 Shortfall penalties for lack of reasonable care when making an estimate If a taxpayer fails to take reasonable care in making an estimate of residual income tax (RIT), or in ensuring that the current estimate remains fair and reasonable for a particular instalment, the 20% shortfall penalty for lack of reasonable care will apply. See s 141A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) and ¶14-112. Under the penalties regime, tax shortfalls are calculated by the Commissioner in accordance with s 141 of the TAA. For the purposes of determining the amount of a tax shortfall in relation to an instalment date and a provisional taxpayer (other than a date and taxpayer using the accounting income method), s 141(14) provides that the tax shortfall is the difference between: ▪ the lesser of:  □ the amount of provisional tax payable on the instalment date if an estimate had not applied at that instalment date (ie the amount payable calculated on the standard uplift basis), and □ the amount that would have been payable on that instalment date if the taxpayer’s provisional tax payable for the tax year had been the taxpayer’s RIT liability for the tax year and ▪ the amount of provisional tax payable on that instalment date as determined by the estimate applying at that instalment date. Example: Harry is a freelance journalist and a provisional taxpayer. He filed his 20X2–X3 tax return that showed RIT of $24,000. Harry estimates his 20X3–X4 provisional tax as $12,000 and makes payments of $4,000 on the first and second instalment dates. Two months before the last instalment date, Harry secures a lucrative contract and his income increases substantially. Harry’s estimated provisional tax payable for the 20X3–X4 tax year increases to $39,000, but Harry does not file a revised estimate with Inland Revenue. He makes his payment of $4,000 under his original estimate on the last instalment date. Harry’s RIT for the year is actually $33,000. Harry is likely to be assessed for lack of reasonable care for not filing a revised estimate before his last instalment date. The shortfall penalty would be calculated as follows: 20% of the difference between: ▪ the lesser of: □ $17,200 (being the provisional tax payable on the last instalment date based on the standard uplift method, ie 3/3 of (105% × $24,000) less payments made), and □ $25,000 (being 3/3 of the RIT of $33,000 less the instalments of $8,000 paid) and ▪ $4,000 (the amount payable on the last instalment date based on the actual estimate). Therefore, the shortfall penalty calculation for the last instalment date will be: 20% × ($17,200 − $4,000) = $2,640 Harry will also incur use of money interest on provisional tax underpayments from the first instalment date.  Law: TAA ss 141(14), 141A  ¶22-090 Accounting income method (AIM) for provisional tax With effect from 1 April 2018, for the 2018–19 and later income years, a new method for calculating provisional tax payable — the Accounting Income Method (AIM) — is available. AIM uses accounting information prepared by a taxpayer for a period as a basis for calculating the tax liability of the business for that period. The resulting amount is payable by the taxpayer as a provisional tax instalment. AIM payments are generated by the accounting software and authorised by the user, whether a business or its advisors. The user confirms the amount to pay and then activates the payment for both GST and  provisional tax. The calculation and payment of provisional tax is integrated into business processes and payment amounts are based on current year tax-adjusted income. Example 1: Benson Electrical Ltd is considering using AIM. They currently use accounting software, pay GST every two months, and have a March balance date. Their accountant talks to them about using AIM due to the unpredictable nature of the contracts they are being awarded. The inability to plan in the past has resulted in exposure to use-of-money interest. They generally have a slow start to the financial year but business picks up in the latter half. Their business is steadily growing and their residual income tax is $180,000 in 2017 and $220,000 in 2018. They ask their accountant to show them what their provisional tax liability would look like under different methods for the 2019 year and how exposure to use-of-money interest would differ. In this scenario, their possible use-of-money interest costs range between nil and $6,880 (based on UOMI rates of 8.22% and 1.02% and taking into account new rules for no UOMI for residual income tax less than $60,000 and no UOMI on the first two provisional tax instalments if using the standard uplift method). GST and provisional tax payment dates  28-Jun  28Aug  28-Oct  15-Jan  28-Feb  7-May  Total prov tax  Income earned 108,000 during current year  Nil 178,000 250,000 178,000 143,000  Implied tax on taxable income  30,240  Nil  49,840  70,000  49,840  40,040 239,960  Provisional tax methods and due dates for payment  28-Jun  28Aug  28-Oct  15-Jan  28-Feb  7-May  AIM  30,240  0  49,840  70,000  49,840  40,040 239,960  0  0  Total prov tax  Terminal UOMI tax due incurred  Uplift 105%  77,000  77,000  77,000 231,000  8,960  737  Uplift 110%  66,000  66,000  66,000 198,000  41,960  3,449  Estimate  40,000  60,000  90,000 190,000  49,960  6,880  Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 10, November 2017 at 55.  Eligibility to use the AIM Section RC 5(5B) sets out the criteria a person must meet to use the AIM to calculate their provisional tax. They must, for the current tax year (which is not a transitional year): ▪ have chosen either □ to use AIM on or before their first instalment date for the current tax year, or □ to change part-year to use the AIM method for their remaining instalment dates, having used either the standard method or GST ratio method at the beginning of the current tax year and having met all of their provisional tax obligations under that method since the beginning of the current tax year ▪ use an AIM-capable accounting system (discussed below) that is up-to-date, and ▪ have annual gross income of $5m or less for the previous tax year.  A person that has annual gross income of more than $5m will still be able to use AIM in the following circumstances: ▪ they have previously used AIM when their income was $5m or less and the Commissioner has approved their continued use of an AIM-capable accounting system (s 124ZE of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA)), or ▪ they have a large business AIM-capable system, being an AIM-capable accounting system approved by the Commissioner for use by a class of taxpayers with annual gross income of more than $5m (s 124ZD of the TAA). In each case, the Commissioner may grant her approval if she decides there is minimal risk the approval will result in less net revenue collectable from the person or class of taxpayers over time. A person will not be eligible to use AIM if the person: ▪ has been liable, in one of the last four years, for a shortfall penalty in relation to their use of AIM ▪ has returned tax liabilities using AIM with the sole purpose or effect of consistently, year-on-year, reducing their tax liabilities below the amounts of reasonably accurate assessments ▪ is a member of one of the following classes of taxpayers that the Commissioner has excluded from using AIM in Determination A1: “Classes of taxpayers that must not use AIM”: □ trustees and beneficiaries of a trust □ partnerships □ taxpayers who have investments in foreign investment funds or controlled foreign companies □ Māori authorities □ portfolio investment entities □ superannuation funds, or ▪ has failed to provide required information (the statement of activity, discussed below) to the Commissioner more than twice for the current tax year. If a person does not meet the requirements, they cannot use AIM for the current tax year. If they stop meeting the requirements part-way through the current year, they will be treated as using the estimation method for the whole of the current tax year and may be subject to use of money interest. AIM-capable accounting system An AIM-capable accounting system is defined as a double-entry accounting system that is an approved AIM provider’s product and uses a core software accounting package (and connected packages) from an approved AIM provider that provides the ability to:  ▪ generate and keep comprehensive financial accounts, including accounting income and expenditure, ledger accounts, trial balances, bank account reconciliations and journals, on an on-demand basis, in accordance with good accounting and tax practices ▪ calculate tax liabilities using tax adjustments for the financial accounts in accordance with a Determination and tax rates set under a Determination (see discussion of determinations issued below) ▪ for tax adjustments not covered by a Determination, ensure they result in reasonably accurate assessments of tax liabilities ▪ recalculate all financial accounts and tax liabilities if retrospective adjustments are required, and ▪ produce reports and other information as required by the Commissioner. In addition, the system must also have electronic communication facilities for giving information in the form prescribed by the Commissioner and for sending and receiving messages and notifications, as well as help documentation for end-users and their tax agents, with ongoing support provided. Calculation of instalments The amount calculated by the AIM-capable accounting system is the amount of provisional tax due to Inland Revenue (IR) on each instalment date. Statement of activity AIM taxpayers must provide IR with an agreed set of information on or before each instalment date (the statement of activity). The Commissioner has issued a Determination A2: “AIM information and form” on the information required. An AIM-capable accounting system will have the ability to map the ledger accounts of the business into an agreed statement of activity form that will be submitted to IR by the software itself. The statement of activity form is not a tax return. It is a summary of what is in the accounting software at that date. Payment dates Taxpayers adopting AIM have to make payments 12 times a year for those registered for monthly GST and six times a year for those who have a six-month or two-month taxable period or who are not registered for GST. The payment dates align with the payment dates for GST. See ¶22-115. Refunds Using AIM when a business fluctuates between profit and loss throughout a year may require IR to refund amounts of overpaid tax in some periods, much the same as is currently the case for GST. The Commissioner will refund overpaid amounts of provisional tax paid through AIM to the taxpayer upon their request before year end. See ¶22-140. No use of money interest is payable by the Commissioner on overpaid AIM provisional tax. Commissioner’s technical determinations  In addition to Determination A1: “Classes of taxpayers that must not use AIM” and Determination A2: “AIM information and form”, the Commissioner has also issued a number of technical determinations detailing the tax adjustments required for accounting income and expenditure under the AIM approach and tax rates for the calculation of tax liabilities under AIM. To ensure commonality across taxpayers and systems, these determinations contain the agreed treatment for the core adjustments required to reach the desired level of accuracy within AIM. This information is contained in a determination rather than the legislation itself so that it is easier to update and account for future technology advancements and tax changes and allows for wider consultation. In brief, the determinations released include the following: ▪ Determination A3: “Tax rates for AIM” This determination prescribes the tax rates that an AIM-capable accounting system must apply to the person’s year-to-date net positive accounting income and expenditure, after tax adjustments, to calculate their current instalment period payment. ▪ Determination A4: “Tax adjustments for private expenditure under AIM” This determination requires a tax adjustment to accounting expenditure to the extent to which that expenditure is of a private or domestic nature. ▪ Determination A5: “Tax adjustments for trading stock under AIM” This determination applies to taxpayers operating a periodic inventory system where their stock-take periods do not align with their AIM instalment periods. Where the taxpayer does not complete a physical stocktake to determine closing stock for the AIM instalment period, the determination requires a tax adjustment so that the taxpayer’s closing value of their trading stock for the period equals the closing value of their trading stock for the income year before the current income year under s CH 1. The opening value of the taxpayer’s trading stock for the next AIM instalment period is equal to the closing stock value. Where the closing value of a taxpayer’s trading stock for the income year before the current income year is materially different from the closing value of a taxpayer’s trading stock for the AIM instalment period, a physical stocktake should be undertaken to ensure a reasonably accurate calculation of the provisional tax liability for the income year. ▪ Determination A6: “Tax adjustments for accounts receivable and accounts payable under AIM” This determination provides that where a taxpayer is not registered for GST or is registered for GST on the payments basis they are not required to accrue accounts receivable and accounts payable in calculating accounting income and expenditure. However, they may elect to adopt an accrual basis and, where an election is made, that election cannot be revoked for the income year. Where a taxpayer is registered for GST on the hybrid basis they may account on a hybrid basis or an accrual basis. Taxpayers registered for GST on an invoice basis must accrue accounts receivable and accounts payable when calculating accounting income and expenditure under AIM.  ▪ Determination A7: “Tax adjustments for losses under AIM” This determination provides that where a loss arises in an earlier AIM instalment period, that loss may be carried forward and offset against accounting income and expenditure for the next AIM instalment period until the loss is fully utilised. This should automatically occur within the AIM-capable software as it will calculate year-todate income and expenditure. In the event that a taxpayer has a loss balance under s IA 3(4) from a prior income year, the loss becomes available to the taxpayer using AIM on the date the income tax return for the prior income year is assessed. The loss balance carried forward is allowed as a tax adjustment to increase accounting expenditure in the instalment period the assessment takes place. ▪ Determination A8: “Tax adjustments for depreciation loss and depreciation recovery income under AIM” This determination requires a taxpayer to choose for an income year either not to account for any depreciation- or amortisation-related income and expenditure in relation to any of their depreciable property or to account for depreciation- and amortisation-related income and expenditure for all their depreciable property using the relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007. Tax adjustments must be made to account for their choice. ▪ Determination A9: “Tax adjustments for provisions under AIM” This determination requires that where accounting expenditure includes a provision, a tax adjustment is made to exclude that expenditure. However, a provision may be included in accounting expenditure where the provision relates to expenditure on employment income for a shareholder-employee of a company. A deduction for such expenditure is limited to the extent to which the company pays tax as an agent of the shareholder-employee in relation to the provision for shareholder remuneration income. ▪ Determination A10: “Tax adjustments for livestock under AIM” This determination applies to livestock that is not used in a dealing business and is therefore excluded from being trading stock under s EB 2(3)(f). It provides that where a taxpayer does not have a perpetual inventory system to determine the closing value of livestock for an AIM instalment period, the taxpayer must complete a physical stocktake for the AIM instalment period. Determination A3–Determination A10 also include examples of the application of the determinations. Determination A3–Determination A10 are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 10, November 2017 at 63. Transfers of overpaid provisional tax Overpaid provisional tax in an AIM taxpaying company may be transferred to the AIM company shareholder-employees to meet their provisional tax liabilities on the dates that their provisional tax is due (regardless of when it is paid in the AIM company). Overpayments of provisional tax that relate to shareholder-employee salary accruals may be transferred to meet the shareholders tax liability on that salary at the end of the income  year. The transfer is treated as a refund for the purposes of the AIM company’s imputation credit account. The AIM company effectively acts as agent for the shareholder-employee (similar to the mechanism trustees have to pay tax on behalf of beneficiaries). This enables an AIM company to make payments on behalf of shareholder-employees that will reduce their RIT for the year and as a consequence could remove them from provisional tax. AIM providers Approval as AIM provider A software provider must undertake a process of self-certification through statutory declaration before they can offer a product that is deemed AIM capable. Under s 124Y of the TAA, the Commissioner may approve a software provider as an approved AIM provider in relation to one or more of their AIM-capable accounting systems, if approval will not negatively affect the integrity of the tax system and they make a statutory declaration: ▪ specifying the name of the products ▪ declaring that their policy is to update the product regularly, and ▪ providing any other information the Commissioner requires. The details of the information required by the Commissioner will be set out in a Determination to be released by IR. Revocation of approval An AIM provider’s approval will be revoked if anything in their statutory declaration is untrue or does not continue to be true after the declaration is made, or revoking the approval positively affects the integrity of the tax system. However, the Commissioner must consult the approved AIM provider before the approval is revoked, with the intention that concerns could be remedied before revocation. The revocation will not take effect until the tax year after the tax year in which the Commissioner notifies the AIM provider of the revocation. The Commissioner may also reverse a revocation before it takes effect if the circumstances giving rise to the revocation have been remedied. An approved AIM provider may choose to revoke their approval by giving notice to the Commissioner. The provider must also immediately give notice of their choice to revoke to all end-users of their products that will be affected by the revocation. The revocation will not take effect until the tax year after the tax year in which the Commissioner receives the notification. The Commissioner may choose to publish a notice regarding approvals or revocations. Required information AIM providers must provide IR with an agreed set of aggregated data within six months of the end of the tax year. The information will relate to their AIM-capable accounting system products, their end-users’ use of the products for a tax year, and any other matters relevant to the AIM for the tax year. The Commissioner is not able to require taxpayerspecific information. Law: IT07 ss RC 5(5B), RC 5(5C), RC 7B, RC 9(4B), RC 10B, RC 35B, RM 6B, YA 1, sch 3; TAA ss 45, 45B, 91AAX–91AAZ, 124Y–124ZE  ¶22-105 GST ratio method for provisional tax The GST ratio method allows provisional taxpayers to base their provisional tax payments on a percentage of their GST taxable supplies. This method addresses concerns taxpayers had with provisional tax payments not being aligned with cash-flow and also reduces a taxpayer’s exposure to use of money interest. Businesses whose income is declining or taxpayers whose income fluctuates during the year may benefit from using this method. Eligibility for GST ratio method Under s RC 16(2) a provisional taxpayer is eligible to use the GST ratio method for calculating provisional tax if, for the preceding tax year and corresponding income year: ▪ their residual income tax (RIT) liability was more than $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500) but no more than $150,000 ▪ they were registered for GST for the whole income year and they did not begin the taxable activity in that tax year, and ▪ the ratio of their RIT to total taxable supplies is between 0–100%. In addition, under s RC 16(3), the taxpayer must be liable to file GST returns for the current tax year on a monthly or two-monthly basis. Taxpayers who choose to use the GST ratio method must fulfil the above criteria and inform the Commissioner of their election before the beginning of the income year. For example, if a taxpayer has a 31 March balance date and they wish to use the GST ratio method for the 2021 income year, they must inform the Commissioner of their election on or before 31 March 2020. The Commissioner will calculate the ratio and advise the taxpayer of their rate before their first provisional tax payment due date. Effect of COVID-19 Note that on 8 July 2020, Inland Revenue announced that, due to the impacts of COVID19, the date by which taxpayers had to inform the Commissioner of their election to use the GST ratio method for calculating provisional tax payments for the 2021 income year had been extended. Affected taxpayers had until 19 August 2020, or the day before the start of their 2021 income year, whichever was the later, to make the election. Additionally, taxpayers were given 10 working days to make the provisional tax payment once they had been notified of their GST ratio. If payment was made within that time frame, any penalties and interest were remitted. When a taxpayer chooses to use the GST ratio method, they are required to make six provisional tax payments (one every two months) along with their GST. Monthly GST payers pay provisional tax on every second GST return. Discontinuing GST ratio method Under s RC 17(1) and (2) a taxpayer must discontinue using the GST ratio method for a tax year if: ▪ their GST registration ends in the current tax year ▪ as a result of a reassessment for the preceding tax year they no longer qualify  ▪ they change their taxable period to a six-monthly taxable period ▪ they fail to file a GST return by the due date and the return is still not filed within 60 days of the due date ▪ their GST ratio percentage changes and is no longer between 0% and 100%, or ▪ their RIT is less than $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500) or is over $150,000. The date on which a person stops using the GST ratio method based on one of the above reasons is determined under s RC 18(3). A taxpayer can also elect to discontinue using the GST ratio method at any time. If a taxpayer defaults in filing their GST returns, they may ask the Commissioner to continue to use the GST ratio method when the default was the result of an event or circumstance beyond their control that provides reasonable justification or excuse for defaulting and the taxpayer remedied the default as soon as practicable: s RC 17(4). If a taxpayer discontinues using the GST ratio method before the first provisional tax instalment date, they can elect to use the standard or estimation methods of calculating provisional tax. They are then treated as never having elected to use the GST ratio method: s RC 18(4). However, if a person discontinues using the GST ratio method after the first provisional tax instalment date, the taxpayer is required to estimate their provisional tax payments for the remainder of the income year and inform the Commissioner: s RC 18(5). Calculation of GST ratio Once a taxpayer elects to use the GST ratio method, the Commissioner will calculate the ratio and inform the taxpayer by including the percentage figure on the taxpayer’s preprinted GST return form, or by some other means. The GST ratio is the percentage figure obtained by dividing the taxpayer’s RIT for the preceding tax year by their total taxable supplies for the same income year. See s RC 8(2). If the taxpayer’s RIT or total taxable supplies (the base amounts) for the preceding year have not been assessed, the base amounts for the year before the preceding year are used: s RC 8(3). However, if for the year before the preceding year the base amounts have not been assessed because of an extension of time to file the return, or the assessment of a base amount is the subject of a dispute or challenge, or that year is a transitional year, then the base amounts for the year that is two years before the preceding year are used (provided they have been assessed, are not subject to challenge and it is not a transitional year): s RC 8(3B). If the preceding year is a transitional year, the taxpayer should ignore the transitional year and use the base amounts for the year before the transitional year. If the base amounts for the year before the transitional year have not been assessed or are the subject of a dispute or challenge, or that year is a transitional year, then the base amounts for the year two years before the transitional year are used (provided they have been assessed, are not subject to challenge and it is not a transitional year). See s RC 8(7) and (7B). Under s RC 8(5), the Commissioner must adjust a taxpayer’s GST ratio if the RIT or total taxable supplies figures used in the formula are revised through, among other reasons:  ▪ an assessment or reassessment of the taxpayer’s income tax return for the preceding tax year ▪ a change in the value of the total taxable supplies for the corresponding income year, or ▪ the disposal of an asset that is not revenue account property and the value of the supply of which is not less than the greater of 5% of the taxpayer’s taxable supplies for the previous 12 months or $1,000. The Commissioner must inform the taxpayer of the new GST ratio and it will apply for instalment dates that occur 30 days after the date they are informed. See s RC 8(6). Calculation of provisional tax To calculate provisional tax payments a taxpayer multiplies their GST ratio for the tax year by their total taxable supplies for the two-month period (monthly payers add the taxable supplies for two return periods). Example: Keith has chosen to use the GST ratio method for the 20X3–X4 income year. The Commissioner has advised that his GST ratio is 8%. Keith is a standard balance date taxpayer. Keith’s provisional tax payments are calculated by multiplying his GST ratio by the total taxable supplies for the instalment period. He will have to pay provisional tax in six instalments on his GST payment dates as follows: Provisional tax instalment due date  Taxable supplies  Calculation of payment  Amount of payment  28 June 20X3  $29,000  $29,000 × 8%  $2,320  28 August 20X3  $28,000  $28,000 × 8%  $2,240  28 October 20X3  $33,000  $33,000 × 8%  $2,640  15 January 20X4  $31,000  $31,000 × 8%  $2,480  28 February 20X4  $27,000  $27,000 × 8%  $2,160  7 May 20X4  $27,000  $27,000 × 8%  $2,160  Disposal of assets There are special rules for when a taxpayer using the GST ratio method disposes of an asset that is not revenue account property and the value of the supply of which is not less than the greater of $1,000 or 5% of the total taxable supplies of the business for the previous 12 months. The taxpayer can elect to take account of the disposal in adjusting their taxable supplies for the relevant taxable period and income year, by subtracting the value, including GST, of the asset from: ▪ the total taxable supplies for a taxable period in proportion to the output tax that is attributed to that taxable period for the supply of the asset, or ▪ the base amount of total taxable supplies for the corresponding income year in proportion to the output tax that is attributed to a taxable period in that income year for the supply of the asset. See s RC 19(2).  In accordance with s RC 19(3) the taxpayer must inform the Commissioner of the disposal of the asset and the value of its supply. Law: IT07 ss RC 5(6), RC 8, RC 11, RC 15–RC 19  ¶22-110 Determination of provisional tax by Commissioner The Commissioner is authorised to increase the amount of provisional tax payable for a tax year, where: ▪ a person fails to furnish a return of income for the immediately preceding tax year ▪ the Commissioner is not satisfied with a return made by a person for any of the two immediately preceding tax years ▪ the Commissioner considers a person is a provisional taxpayer, although that person has not furnished a return of income ▪ the taxpayer is using the accounting income method (AIM) and the approved AIM provider’s product they are using calculates tax liabilities that are not reasonably accurate assessments ▪ the Commissioner considers that an estimate of RIT furnished under s RC 7 is not fair and reasonable at the time at which it was made or on any instalment date, or ▪ a person is required, under ss RC 7 and RC 18(5), to estimate his or her RIT and fails to provide an estimate or re-estimate to the Commissioner. See s 119(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Any adjustment under these provisions is limited to the amount of provisional tax that would be payable if no estimate had been made. Under s 119(2) of the TAA the Commissioner can also adjust the provisional tax payable by a provisional taxpayer where: ▪ the Commissioner considers that the provisional tax that would be payable is excessive due to: □ foreign tax credits on controlled foreign companies (ss LK 1, LK 6) □ an exemption for principals resident abroad and their New Zealand agents (s HD 29(3)) □ credits for tax paid in a country or territory outside New Zealand (s LJ 1), or □ any double tax agreement. The Commissioner is required to notify the taxpayer of any adjustment. If the provisional tax determined by the Commissioner is increased, he must also give time (ie at least 30 days after issuing the notice) for the payment of the shortfall and any resulting penalties. The exception is where an estimate by the taxpayer was not fair and reasonable. In that case, the shortfall for any instalment date for which the estimate had effect is treated as due and payable on that instalment date. See s 119(4). A taxpayer is entitled to object to  (under Pt 8 of the TAA), or challenge (under Pt 8A), any provisional tax determined by the Commissioner. Law: IT07 s RC 5(7); TAA s 119  ¶22-115 Instalments of provisional tax The general rule for the standard and estimation methods is that provisional tax is payable in three equal instalments on the interest instalment dates for the tax year in the months specified in sch 3, pt A for the taxpayer’s corresponding income year, see s RC 9(3). Thus, the instalment dates set by sch 3 depend on the taxpayer’s balance date. See ¶22-012. If the total amount is not divisible into equal instalments, the final instalment will make up the difference. The dates of payment of provisional tax are aligned with GST payment dates. Generally an instalment date will be the 28th day of the month. However, to take account of the Christmas and Easter holiday periods, the payment for 28 December is due on 15 January and the payment for 28 April is due on 7 May. The general rule does not apply to: ▪ a provisional taxpayer who pays GST on a six-monthly basis, uses the GST ratio method, changes from the GST ratio method, or changes their cycle of taxable periods, or ▪ a new provisional taxpayer (one with an initial provisional tax liability) who pays GST on a six-monthly basis or pays GST on a monthly or two-monthly basis and starts a taxable activity within 30 days before the taxpayer’s instalment date B in their corresponding income year, or ▪ a provisional taxpayer who uses the accounting income method (AIM), or ▪ a provisional taxpayer who has not provided an annual return for the preceding tax year and whose RIT for the tax year immediately before the preceding tax year was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less), or ▪ a transitional year (see s RC 9(4) and ¶22-120). Accounting income method (AIM) — s RC 9(4B) A provisional taxpayer who uses AIM must pay provisional tax: ▪ if they are not registered for GST, or have a six-month taxable period, on the six instalment dates in the months set out in sch 3, pt A, columns A, B, C, D, E and F for their balance date, or ▪ if they have a two-month taxable period, on the group of six instalment dates in the months set out in either sch 3, pt A, columns A, B, C, D, E and F or sch 3, pt A, columns A1, B1, C1, D1, E1 and F1 that corresponds to the due dates for their GST returns, or ▪ if they have a one-month taxable period, on the 12 instalment dates in the months set out in sch 3, pt A, columns A to F1 for their corresponding income year.  Part-year change to AIM — s RC 9(4C) A provisional taxpayer who changes to AIM part way through the year under s RC 5(5B) must use the relevant remaining instalment dates for them under the AIM method. The amount of each relevant instalment is calculated under s RC 10B. GST on six-monthly basis — s RC 9(5) A provisional taxpayer who pays GST on a six-monthly basis must pay provisional tax on the two interest instalment dates for the tax year in the months set out in sch 3, pt A, columns C and F for the taxpayer’s corresponding income year. This will apply to a new provisional taxpayer other than one who pays GST on a six-monthly basis and starts a taxable activity within 30 days before the date of instalment C. Example 1: Taxpayers with a standard balance date (31 March) will be liable to make provisional tax payments on 28 October for the six months to 30 September, and 7 May for the six months to 31 March.  GST ratio method — s RC 9(6) A provisional taxpayer who uses a GST ratio must pay provisional tax on the six ratio instalment dates in the months set out in sch 3, pt A, columns A, B, C, D, E and F for the taxpayer’s corresponding income year. The amount of each instalment is calculated under s RC 11. Example 2: Taxpayers with a standard balance date will be liable to make payments on the following dates: P1 — 28 June  P4 — 15 January  P2 — 28 August  P5 — 28 February  P3 — 28 October  P6 — 7 May  Changing calculation method — s RC 9(7) If a provisional taxpayer changes their method of determining provisional tax from the GST ratio method under s RC 18, the taxpayer must pay provisional tax payable for the tax year on the relevant instalment dates for the replacement method. The amount of each instalment is calculated under s RC 10. Changing taxable periods — s RC 9(8) A provisional taxpayer who changes the cycle of their taxable periods under s 15C of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 must pay provisional tax on the instalment dates specified in s RC 27 as follows: ▪ if the provisional taxpayer uses the standard or estimation method and changes from a monthly or two-monthly basis to a six-monthly basis, instalments are payable on whichever of instalments C and F of sch 3, pt A for their corresponding income year that occur after the change takes effect  ▪ if the provisional taxpayer uses the standard or estimation method and changes from a six-monthly basis to a monthly or two-monthly basis, instalments are payable on whichever of instalments B, D and F of sch 3, pt A for their corresponding income year that occur after the change takes effect. Persons with an initial provisional tax liability — s RC 9(9) A person with an initial provisional tax liability who starts a taxable activity in a tax year is liable to pay interest under s 120KC of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) as if they were liable to pay provisional tax as set out in s RC 9(9). That provision sets out when a person with an initial provisional tax liability is liable to pay provisional tax in one, two or three instalments. An initial provisional tax liability is defined for a non-natural person as a provisional tax liability for a tax year in which the person starts to derive income from a taxable activity when they did not derive income from a taxable activity in any of the four previous tax years and they have residual income tax (RIT) of $60,000 or more in the tax year. An initial provisional tax liability for a natural person is defined as a provisional tax liability for a tax year when: ▪ they did not have RIT of more than $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500) in any of the four previous tax years ▪ they have RIT of $60,000 (before 1 April 2017, $50,000) or more in the tax year, and ▪ in the tax year, they stopped deriving employment income and then started to derive income from a taxable activity. A person with an initial provisional tax liability must pay provisional tax for the tax year: ▪ in three instalments if they start a taxable activity in the period that starts at the beginning of the corresponding income year and ends 30 days before the date of instalment B of sch 3, pt A ▪ in two instalments if s RC 13 applies (see below) or if they pay GST on a six-monthly basis and start a taxable activity in the period that starts at the beginning of the corresponding income year and ends 30 days before the date of instalment C of sch 3, pt A ▪ in one instalment if s RC 14 applies (see below). The amount of provisional tax payable is calculated in accordance with s RC 10. See ¶22075. Note that an instalment calculated under s RC 9 is truncated to whole dollars, eg $10.98 to $10. QB 19/04 In April 2019, Inland Revenue released QB 19/04 “Income tax — provisional tax and use of money interest implications for a person in their first year of business” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 5, June 2019 at 15). The item considers the situation of a taxpayer starting a taxable activity who did not have RIT of $2,500 in the previous year. (Note that  the discussion in QB 19/04 refers to the previous RIT threshold of $2,500 applying at that time. This figure was increased to $5,000 with effect from the 2020–21 year. However, the analysis in the QWBA remains the same.) The item considers the meaning of “taxable activity” in this context, applying the GST approach, and concludes that anything done in connection with the beginning of a taxable activity is treated as part of that taxable activity. However, if no taxable activity is subsequently commenced, the commencement actions are not sufficient on their own to be treated as a taxable activity. If the taxpayer has RIT of $60,000 or more, QB 19/04 confirms the taxpayer will be liable to interest if they do not make one to three instalments of provisional tax, depending on the start date of their taxable activity. If their RIT is less than $60,000, they will only be exposed to interest if they do not pay their RIT by terminal tax date. The QWBA contains a flowchart and examples to illustrate these points. Payments in two instalments — s RC 13 Under s RC 13, a person with an initial provisional tax liability (other than a person who pays GST on a six-monthly basis) may pay provisional tax in two instalments where their first business day occurs in the period that starts 30 days before the date of instalment B of sch 3, pt A and ends 30 days before the date of instalment D of sch 3, pt A. Where business first commences within that period, provisional tax must be paid on instalment dates D and F of sch 3, pt A. “First business day” is defined in s YA 1. For a non-natural person, it generally means the first day in an income year on which income is derived or expenditure is incurred from carrying on a taxable activity. For a natural person, it generally means the day after the last day he or she derived income from employment. In addition, provisional taxpayers who are not required to file their last year’s income tax return by instalment date B (by reason of extension of time arrangements under s 37 of the TAA), whose RIT for the tax year before the preceding tax year was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less), and who provide their return in the period between instalment dates B and D, may also pay their provisional tax on the dates of instalments D and F of sch 3, pt A. See s RC 13(1)(b). Payment in one instalment — s RC 14 Provisional tax is payable in one instalment on the date of instalment F of sch 3, pt A by: ▪ A person with an initial provisional tax liability whose first business day occurs in the period that starts 30 days before the date of instalment D of sch 3, pt A and ends at the end of the corresponding income year. ▪ A provisional taxpayer whose income tax return for the preceding tax year is not filed by instalment date D (by reason of an extension of time arrangement under s 37 of the TAA) and whose RIT for the tax year before the preceding tax year was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less). ▪ A person who pays GST on a six-monthly basis, whose first business day occurs in the period that starts 30 days before the date of instalment C of sch 3, pt A and ends at the end of the corresponding income year, or whose income tax return for the preceding tax year is not filed by instalment date C (by reason of an extension of time arrangement under s 37 of the TAA) and whose RIT for the tax year before the  preceding tax year was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less). Law: IT07 ss RA 4, RA 14, RC 9, RC 13, RC 14, RC 27, YA 1, sch 3, pt A; TAA s 120KC  ¶22-120 Provisional tax instalment dates for transitional year The instalment dates for provisional tax are based on a taxpayer’s balance date, so when that balance date changes the pattern of provisional tax instalments also changes. The due dates for provisional tax in such a situation are set out in s RC 21. The total amount of provisional tax payable in a transitional year (the year in which the Commissioner notifies a change in balance date) is the total of all instalments of provisional tax due in the transitional year: s RC 21(1). Overall, the pattern and number of provisional tax instalments will be based on the old balance date. Generally, payments are required every four months. However, payments are required every six months for taxpayers on a six-monthly basis and every two months for GST ratio method taxpayers. Modifications to the general instalment dates are included in s RC 21(4). Instalments of provisional tax due in a transitional year are as follows: For all instalments, except for the final instalment: ▪ the 28th of the months specified in sch 3, pt B (see ¶22-012), or ▪ the 15th of January (if the month is December), or ▪ the 7th of May (if the month is April) (see s RC 21(2)). For the final instalment: ▪ the 28th day of the month following the final month in the transitional year, or ▪ the 15th of January (if the final month in the transitional year is November), or ▪ the 7th of May (if the final month in the transitional year is March) (see s RC 21(3)). When determining the number of months in a transitional year: ▪ the first whole month in the transitional year is the first month ▪ the final month is the month in which their new balance date occurs, and ▪ each month falling between the first and final months must be included. Law: IT07 ss RC 21, YA 1; TAA ss 39, 39B  ¶22-122 Amount of provisional tax instalments in a transitional year Standard method  For standard method taxpayers, the amount payable at each instalment date (other than the final instalment) in relation to a transitional year is determined by the following formula set out in s RC 22(2). (person’s provisional tax × instalments payable ÷ total instalments) − tax previously payable where: person’s provisional tax is the person’s provisional tax liability under s RC 5(2) or (3) instalments payable is the number of instalments the person has in the transitional year on or before the instalment date total instalments is whichever of the following applies: — 3, for a person who pays on instalment dates B, D and F, or — 2, for a person who pays on instalment dates C and F tax previously payable is the amount for the transitional year of the person’s provisional tax payable before the instalment date. The amount payable on the final instalment date is determined by the following formula in s RC 22(4): (person’s provisional tax × transitional year days ÷ preceding year days) − tax previously payable where: person’s provisional tax is the person’s provisional tax liability under s RC 5(2) or (3) transitional year days is the number of days in the person’s transitional year preceding year days is the number of days in the person’s preceding tax year tax previously payable is the amount of provisional tax for a tax year calculated on the basis of the person’s transitional year that is payable before the instalment date. Example 1: On 20 April 20X3, Barry received approval from Inland Revenue to change his balance date from 30 April 20X4 to 31 July 20X4. Barry uses the standard uplift method to calculate provisional tax payable. Barry’s 20X2–X3 RIT is $40,000. Barry’s 20X3–X4 tax year is a transitional year of 15 months, from 1 May 20X3 to 31 July 20X4 (ie 457 days). The 20X3–X4 provisional tax instalment dates will be 28 September 20X3, 28 January 20X4, 28 May 20X4 and 28 August 20X4. See s RC 21(5) and sch 3 pt B. The amount payable on each of the first three instalments is calculated as follows (s RC 22(2)): (person’s provisional tax × instalments payable ÷ total instalments) − tax previously payable 28 September 20X3  (($40,000 × 105%) × 1 ÷ 3) − $0  =  $14,000  28 January 20X4  (($40,000 × 105%) × 2 ÷ 3) − $14,000  =  $14,000  28 May 20X4  (($40,000 × 105%) × 3 ÷ 3) −  =  $14,000  $28,000 The amount payable on the final instalment is calculated as follows (s RC 22(4)): (person’s provisional tax × transitional year days ÷ preceding year days) − tax previously payable 28 August 20X4  (($40,000 × 105%) × 457 ÷ 365) − $42,000 = $10,586  Estimation method For taxpayers who are estimating their residual income tax (RIT) for a transitional year, the amount payable on the first two instalments is determined by the following formula in s RC 23(2): (tax estimate × instalments payable ÷ transitional months) − tax previously payable where: tax estimate is the person’s provisional tax liability last estimated by the person under s RC 5(5) instalments payable is either: — 4 multiplied by the number of instalments in the person’s transitional year payable on or before the instalment date, for a person who pays on the equivalent of instalment dates B, D and F, or — 6 multiplied by the number of instalments in the person’s transitional year payable on or before the instalment date, for a person who pays on the equivalent of instalment dates C and F transitional months is the number of months in the person’s transitional year tax previously payable is the amount of provisional tax for a tax year calculated on the basis of the person’s transitional year that is payable before the instalment date. The amount payable on the final instalment date is the amount calculated under s RC 5(5) less the amount of any instalment previously payable (see s RC 23(4)). Example 2: Assume the same facts apply as in Example 1, except that Barry estimates his provisional tax liability. The estimate made for the 20X3–X4 transitional year is $45,000 (ignoring modifications for reduction in tax rates). The amount payable on each of the first three instalments is calculated as follows (s RC 23(2)): (tax estimate × instalments payable ÷ transitional months) − tax previously payable 28 September 20X3  ($45,000 × (4 × 1) ÷ 15)  − $0  = $12,000  28 January 20X4  ($45,000 × (4 × 2) ÷ 15)  − $12,000  = $12,000  28 May 20X4  ($45,000 × (4 × 3) ÷ 15)  − $24,000  = $12,000  The amount payable on the final instalment is the amount calculated under s RC 5(5) less the amount of any instalment previously payable (s RC 23(4)). Therefore, the final instalment on 28 August 20X4 will be $9,000 ($45,000 − $36,000).  In a transitional year, if the person uses the estimation method and changes their balance date, they must: ▪ before the date on which the Commissioner notifies a change in balance date, estimate the residual income tax as if no change in balance date is or will be approved, and ▪ after the date on which the Commissioner notifies a change in balance date, reestimate the residual income tax. See s RC 25(4). GST ratio method For provisional taxpayers using the GST ratio method for a transitional year, for a period or part period before the start of the new income year, the person must apply the GST ratio under s RC 11 on whichever dates of instalments A, B, C, D, E and F for their corresponding income year occur in the transitional year (see s RC 24). When GST ratio method taxpayers change their balance date and move from a set of instalment dates in even-numbered months to a set of instalment dates in odd-numbered months, or vice versa, there will be a one-month period when GST and provisional tax are due before they change to their new balance date. The taxpayers must determine the amount of provisional tax due for this period by applying the GST ratio to the one-month’s GST taxable supplies. See s RC 25(5). When taxpayers change their balance date and their GST taxable periods do not align with their new balance date, the taxpayers adjust their GST taxable periods to align with the new balance date. See s RC 25(7). Persons with an initial provisional tax liability who change their balance date Persons with an initial provisional tax liability, and certain provisional taxpayers who pay GST on a six-monthly basis, who change their balance date are provided for in s RC 21(4). This section effectively removes the obligation to pay either the first or second instalment, depending on when the taxpayer started business. Consequently, taxpayers with an initial provisional tax liability will have at least one provisional tax payment to make during the transitional year, unless their first business day occurs within 30 days before the date of instalment F of sch 3 pt A. See s RC 21(4)(c). See also ¶22-080. Law: IT07 ss RC 22–RC 25; TAA ss 39, 39B  ¶22-125 Registering or deregistering for GST and provisional tax When a provisional taxpayer who uses the standard or estimation method registers for GST on a monthly or two-monthly basis part way through the year, or cancels or has their registration cancelled having paid on that basis, their provisional tax payments do not change as they are due on the same due dates for payment of GST with regard to: ▪ the 2nd, 4th and 6th GST returns for a two-monthly GST payer, or ▪ the 4th, 8th and 12th GST returns for a monthly GST payer. However, the position is not quite so clear for taxpayers who register for GST and elect to account for GST on a six-monthly basis. On a plain reading of the legislation they must pay  their instalments of provisional tax on whichever dates of instalments C and F for their corresponding income year coincide with the cycle of their taxable periods after they become a registered person. However, Inland Revenue’s view is that they must pay their provisional tax on the old basis until the beginning of their six-monthly period, that is the change only applies with effect from the beginning of the six-monthly period. Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 contains the following example, at 71: Mary begins GST on 1 July and elects to be on a six-monthly basis. Her balance date is 31 March and she will pay provisional tax on the old payments basis until the end of September when she will begin paying provisional tax on a six-monthly basis. Provisional tax payments will therefore be due on 28 August (old basis) and 28 April (new basis). The same approach is applied to a taxpayer who accounts for GST on a six-monthly basis when they deregister. Following deregistration, they must pay provisional tax three times a year on the standard provisional tax dates. The legislation provides that the next payment will be due on whichever of the three standard provisional tax payment instalment dates B, D and F that occurs 30 days from the date of deregistration. For these purposes the date of cancellation of GST registration will be the later of the date on which the cancellation is notified and the date on which the taxpayer ceases to be liable to be registered under s 52 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Inland Revenue’s view is that they must pay on the old basis until the new basis applies, ie the new basis only applies with effect from deregistration. The TIB includes the following example: Denis has a March balance date and pays GST on a six-monthly basis. On 11 October Denis deregisters for GST. He makes the 28 October payment on the old basis and then his next provisional tax payments are due on 15 January and 28 April. Note that although the correct interpretation of the section is arguable, Inland Revenue’s approach is supported by parliamentary intent, as evidenced by the legislative commentary when the relevant legislation was introduced. Law: IT07 s RC 26  ¶22-130 Voluntary payments of provisional tax A person may at any time make voluntary payments of an amount of provisional tax that: ▪ relates to their income tax liability for a tax year in which they are not liable for provisional tax, or ▪ is more than the provisional tax payable by them for the tax year, or ▪ is more than the income tax payable by them for the tax year. A taxpayer may make a voluntary payment in an attempt to reduce exposure to use of money interest charges when there is a known tax shortfall. In addition, individuals whose residual income tax is under $60,000 may make a voluntary payment to reduce their terminal tax liability without filing a formal estimation (with Inland Revenue) that would bring them within the use of money interest provisions. See also ¶22-352. Law: IT07 ss RA 2, RC 12  ¶22-140 Refund and transfer of overpaid provisional tax Refund Provisional tax must be refunded by the Commissioner if: ▪ provisional tax has been paid in excess, because the amount of provisional tax payable for a tax year is reduced by the taxpayer or by the Commissioner under s 119(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), or ▪ the residual income tax (RIT) of a provisional taxpayer for a tax year is not more than $5,000 (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500), and the taxpayer has already paid instalments of provisional tax (other than the final instalment) for the next succeeding tax year. In both cases, the taxpayer must apply for a refund of the excess provisional tax paid. Before the refund is made, the excess amount paid is first applied by the Commissioner in payment of any outstanding income tax for any earlier tax year, in accordance with the provisional taxpayer’s or his or her agent’s request under s 173T of the TAA. If any excess remains this will be refunded to the provisional taxpayer. See ¶2-148. Under s RM 12 when an overpayment or amount of provisional tax for a tax year has been applied or refunded, a later instalment is calculated as if the total instalments previously payable were reduced by the amount of the overpayment or amount. From the date of refund or credit, the overpayment or amount applied or refunded is deemed not to be provisional tax paid for that tax year. For discussion on the Commissioner’s obligation to pay use of money interest on refunds of provisional tax, see ¶22-350. Refunds of overpaid AIM instalments Taxpayers adopting the accounting income method can request a refund of overpaid provisional tax payments from the Commissioner. The Commissioner must refund amounts of overpaid AIM provisional tax throughout the income year where the AIM payments to date exceed the AIM calculation of provisional tax liability, provided the taxpayer has provided all required information. An AIM taxpayer can only request a refund of actual provisional tax paid in the current year. No use-of-money interest will be payable by the Commissioner on overpaid AIM provisional tax. The Commissioner is also not able to refuse to refund amounts owing under AIM due to an outstanding tax liability in another area such as PAYE or GST. For a discussion of the ability of an AIM taxpaying company to transfer overpaid provisional tax to its shareholders to meet their provisional tax liabilities, see ¶22-090. Transfers The amount of overpaid provisional tax that can be transferred is determined by formulas set out in ss 173P–173R of the TAA. The formulas apply to transfers within a taxpayer’s own account and transfers between “related” taxpayers as set out in s 173M(2)(a)–(f) and (3) (for a summary of these parties see ¶2-148). In each case, the provisional tax must be overpaid on the date on which the request for transfer is actioned. Also, for transfers of overpaid provisional tax before assessment, only a temporary transfer is allowed if, as a  result of the transfer, the taxpayer would not be able to meet a subsequent provisional tax liability for the tax year. Overpaid provisional tax determined before assessment for standard uplift payers For taxpayers who pay provisional tax on the standard uplift basis, the amount of provisional tax that can be transferred on a particular date (date A) is calculated as follows (see s 173P(2)): provisional tax paid − refunds − provisional tax liability where: provisional tax paid is the provisional tax paid for a tax year on or before date A (this includes any voluntary payments of provisional tax and tax transferred to the taxpayer) refunds are provisional tax refunds paid to the taxpayer on or before date A (this includes any tax transferred by the taxpayer or offset by the Commissioner against unpaid tax), and provisional tax liability is the provisional tax payable by date A. Example 1: Sue is a standard balance date taxpayer. Her provisional tax liability for the 20X3–X4 tax year, calculated on the uplift basis, is $45,000 (ie $15,000 is due on each instalment date). On 28 August 20X3 Sue pays provisional tax of $20,000 and, on 15 January 20X4 a payment of $15,000 is made. On 20 February 20X4, Sue’s accountant writes to the Inland Revenue (IR) and requests a transfer of the overpaid provisional tax to Sue’s PAYE account. No tax refunds, offsets or other tax transfers have been made to or from Sue’s tax account at the time at which the request is made. The amount of provisional tax available to be transferred is calculated as follows: provisional tax paid − refunds − provisional tax liability = ($20,000 + $15,000) − 0 − ($15,000 + $15,000) = $35,000 − $30,000 = $5,000. The transfer of $5,000 will be allowed as Sue has still satisfied her provisional tax obligations up to the date on which the transfer is actioned (ie 20 February 20X4). The third instalment date has not yet passed, and it is assumed that this instalment will be paid on 7 May 20X4.  Overpaid provisional tax determined before assessment for estimators For a taxpayer who estimates provisional tax or at first pays provisional tax on the uplift basis and then estimates, the amount of overpaid provisional tax available for transfer on a particular date (date A) is calculated as follows (see s 173Q(2)): provisional tax paid − refunds − estimated RIT where: provisional tax paid is the provisional tax paid for a tax year on or before date A (this includes any voluntary payments of provisional tax and tax transferred to the taxpayer) refunds are provisional tax refunds paid to the taxpayer on or before date A (this includes any tax transferred by the taxpayer or offset by the Commissioner against unpaid tax), and  estimated RIT is the estimated RIT or revised estimated RIT due by date A for the purpose of calculating use of money interest, calculated as if the estimated or revised estimated RIT were RIT and the “safe harbour” provisions in s 120KE(1) of the TAA did not apply. In addition to the requirement for the estimating provisional taxpayer to be able to meet his or her provisional tax liability after the transfer, the maximum amount that can be transferred is the net provisional tax paid (ie the tax paid less refunds of that tax) less the revised estimated or estimated RIT for the tax year. See s 173Q(4). Example 2: Bill is a standard balance date taxpayer. He estimates his 20X3–X4 RIT at $300,000 and makes a payment of $100,000 on 28 August 20X3 on this basis. On 15 January 20X4 Bill revises his estimate to $250,000 and makes a payment of $75,000. On 7 May 20X4 it is clear that Bill’s RIT for the 20X3–X4 tax year is more likely to be $150,000. A revised estimate for this amount is filed with IR and no further provisional tax payments are made. Bill makes a request for the transfer of the excess provisional tax paid to his wife at the earliest date available. No tax refunds, offsets or other tax transfers have been made to or from Bill’s tax account at the time at which the request is made. The amount that can be transferred at 28 August 20X3 is calculated as follows: provisional tax paid − refunds − estimated RIT. A total of $25,000 is available for transfer (being provisional tax paid of $175,000 − revised estimated RIT of $150,000). 28 August 20X3  15 January 20X4  7 May 20X4  $  $  $  100,000  175,000  175,000  0  25,000  25,000  less estimated RIT  50,000  100,000  150,000  provisional tax overpaid  50,0001  50,000  0  provisional tax paid less refunds  1  Although the amount of $50,000 is calculated under the formula as being available for transfer at 28 August 20X3, the amount is restricted to $25,000, being the net provisional tax paid of $175,000 less the revised estimated RIT for 20X3–X4 of $150,000. See s 173Q(4). The full amount of $25,000 can be transferred at 28 August 20X3 as after the transfer Bill has met his estimated provisional tax liability for the 20X3–X4 tax year. See s 173Q(3).  Overpaid provisional tax determined after assessment (standard uplift payers and estimators) Once a taxpayer’s RIT for the year has been assessed, the amount of overpaid provisional tax available for transfer on a particular date (date A) is calculated as follows (see s 173R(2)): provisional tax paid − refunds − residual income tax where: provisional tax paid is the provisional tax paid for a tax year on or before date A (this includes any voluntary payments of provisional tax and tax transferred to the taxpayer) refunds are provisional tax refunds paid to the taxpayer on or before date A (this includes any tax transferred by the taxpayer or offset by the Commissioner against unpaid tax), and  residual income tax is the taxpayer’s RIT that would be due by date A for the purpose of calculating use of money interest, calculated as if the “safe harbour” provisions in s 120KE(1) of the TAA did not apply. An amount may not be transferred if, as a result, the taxpayer would be liable to pay interest on unpaid tax or would have a late payment penalty imposed in respect of his or her provisional tax payments for the tax year on a date that is later than the date of transfer. This situation would arise if there was a refund or transfer of provisional tax after the date of transfer or if provisional tax for the year was prepaid by the date of transfer. However, a temporary transfer is allowed, ie the taxpayer must request a transfer back to his or her account to prevent the interest or late payment penalty being imposed. See s 173R(3). Also, the amount transferred may not be more than the net provisional tax paid for a tax year less the RIT for the year. See s 173R(4). Example 3: Colin is a standard balance date taxpayer and pays 20X3–X4 provisional tax on the uplift basis. He pays $20,000 on 28 August 20X3 and a further $20,000 on 15 January 20X4 but does not make a payment on 7 May 20X4. Colin’s 20X2–X3 RIT is assessed at $15,000. His accountant requests a transfer of Colin’s overpaid 20X3–X4 provisional tax to a company in which Colin is a shareholder-employee at the earliest possible date. No tax refunds, offsets or other tax transfers have been made to or from Colin’s tax account at the time at which the request is made. The amount of overpaid provisional tax available for transfer is calculated as follows: provisional tax paid − refunds − residual income tax A total of $25,000 is available for transfer (being provisional tax paid of $40,000 − RIT of $15,000). 28 August 20X3  15 January 20X4  7 May 20X4  $  $  $  20,000  40,000  40,000  0  15,000  25,000  less RIT  5,000  10,000  15,000  provisional tax overpaid  15,0001  15,0002  0  provisional tax paid less refunds  1  The amount of $15,000 is calculated under the formula as being available for transfer at 28 August 20X3. This amount can be transferred (reflected as “refunds” in the 15 January 20X4 column). 2  Although the amount of $15,000 is calculated under the formula as being available for transfer at 15 January 20X4, this amount cannot be transferred. This is because to do so, the total amount transferred in the tax year will exceed the total amount of provisional tax overpaid for the 20X3–X4 tax year. The amount transferred at 15 January 20X4 will be restricted to $10,000. See s 173R(4).  Law: IT07 ss RM 6B, RM 12; TAA ss 119(2), 173P–173R, 173T  ¶22-145 Using GST refund to pay provisional tax If a provisional taxpayer has a GST refund taxable period, he or she may choose to use the refund to pay some or all of an instalment of provisional tax due on the same instalment date. Note that if a taxpayer elects to use some or all of his or her GST refund to pay his or her provisional tax, and the Commissioner makes an amended assessment that reduces the  amount of the refund, then the reduced amount will be the amount of the payment of provisional tax. Law: IT07 s RM 11  ¶22-200 Penalties and interest for unpaid provisional tax Late payment penalties Late payment penalties and use of money interest apply to underpaid provisional tax. An initial late payment penalty of 1% is applied to the amount of the unpaid tax from the day after the due date for payment. A further initial late payment penalty of 4% is charged if the tax remains unpaid seven days after the due date (ie the additional 4% penalty is imposed on the 8th day after the due date). Before 1 April 2017, this was also followed by a monthly incremental penalty of 1% until the date of payment, but this was removed in relation to provisional tax from the 2017–18 income year. See s 139B(2) and (2B) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Each additional penalty is applied on a compounding basis, ie it is imposed on any unpaid provisional tax plus any late payment penalties that have been imposed in respect of that unpaid tax. Section 139B(6) defines the term “tax to pay” as meaning an amount equal to the unpaid tax together with any late payment penalty that has been imposed in whole or in part in respect of the unpaid tax, to the extent that at that time the amount remains unpaid. The unpaid tax is deemed to be the last part of any tax to pay that a taxpayer pays. “Unpaid tax” includes an amount of tax that must be withheld or deducted and paid to the Commissioner under a tax law but does not include a late payment penalty or a shortfall penalty imposed under s 141ED for not paying employer monthly schedule amount. A late payment penalty will only arise on unpaid provisional tax to the extent that the provisional tax payable exceeds the provisional tax paid. See s 139C(1). The terms “provisional tax payable” and “provisional tax paid” are defined in s 139C(2). Use of GST refund An exception to the above is where a person elects that an amount of a GST refund be used to pay an amount of provisional tax due on an instalment date, and the Commissioner reassesses the amount of the GST refund as being less than the elected amount. In that case the taxpayer will not be liable for a late payment penalty in relation to the amount of any shortfall in their payment of provisional tax as a result of the reassessment until 30 days after the Commissioner gives notice of the reassessment or a later date set by the Commissioner. See s 139C(1B) and (1C). Interest concession provisional taxpayers Another exception to the above is if the person is an interest concession provisional taxpayer (see ¶22-352). In that case, the amount of unpaid tax for a failed instalment that the late payment penalty may be applied to is limited to the lowest of the following amounts: ▪ the standard instalment amount due minus the amount actually paid, or  ▪ one-third (or one divided by the number of instalments if the number is not three) of the taxpayer’s residual income tax minus the amount actually paid. See ss 120KBB(3)(b), 139C(1D) and 139C(1E). Accounting income method Late payment penalties may apply to payments of provisional tax under the accounting income method (AIM) approach. Shortfall penalties for lack of reasonable care may also apply if there is a large variation between provisional tax payments under AIM and a taxpayer’s year-end terminal tax liability. The definition of “tax position” includes the use of the AIM approach and the software product of an approved AIM provider. However, s 141B(1E) ensures that a taxpayer does not take an unacceptable tax position by merely using the AIM approach and an approved AIM-capable accounting system. This does not apply to large taxpayers with annual gross incomes exceeding $5m or taxpayers that use a large business AIM-capable system (see s 141B(1F). Use of money interest Use of money interest also applies from the day after the first provisional tax payment is due if the taxpayer is not a safe-harbour taxpayer or an interest concession provisional taxpayer. Use of money interest generally runs from the last instalment date for interest concession provisional taxpayers. Safe-harbour taxpayers are not liable for use of money interest on unpaid provisional tax but will be subject to use of money interest in respect of unpaid terminal tax. For a full discussion of use of money interest, see ¶22-352. Remission or cancellation Late payment penalties will not be charged if the unpaid tax does not exceed $100. See s 183F of the TAA. For discussion on the remission of the 4% initial late payment penalty and the 1% incremental late payment penalty, see ¶14-180. Use of money interest may also be cancelled in terms of ss 183C and 183E of the TAA. See ¶22-355. Note that in August 2018, Inland Revenue released a standard practice statement, SPS 18/04, “Options for relief from tax debt” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 9, October 2018 at 37). This SPS updated and replaced the previous statement, SPS 15/02, from 22 August 2018. The statement summarises the Commissioner’s practice when considering options for removing or deferring the obligation to pay tax, interest and/or penalties. Law: TAA ss 139B, 139BA, 139C, 141B(1E), (1F), 183F  ¶22-220 Offsets of provisional tax within wholly-owned group Wholly-owned groups of companies are eligible to offset overestimates of provisional tax between members of the group. Any allocation of excess payments of provisional tax must be taken into account when applying the use of money interest provisions under Pt 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Provisional tax overpaid by one company (company A) within a wholly-owned group may be transferred against the underpaid provisional tax by another member of that group (company B). Company A must notify the Commissioner and specify the date on which the  excess amount is deemed to be allocated to company B. This notice must be given to the Commissioner within the time for which the income tax return for company B is required to be furnished, or within such further time as the Commissioner may allow. The allocation cannot be earlier than the day on which the overpayment occurred or the first instalment date of company B, whichever is the later. The allocation is subject to the limit on refunds of tax not being allowed to exceed the company’s imputation credit account balance — see ¶17-105. Also see ¶22-140 regarding transfers of overpaid provisional tax. Law: IT07 s RC 32  ¶22-225 Offset of further income tax A company will have further income tax to pay where it is an imputation credit account (ICA) company and has a debit balance in its ICA at the end of any imputation year or where there is a debit balance in the company’s ICA immediately before the company ceases to be an ICA company. The payment of any instalment of provisional tax for which the company may become liable after the date of the payment of the further income tax may, on the election of the company, be satisfied by the amount of further income tax. The Commissioner must credit the amount of the further income tax in payment successively to amounts of provisional tax until the credit is extinguished. See s RC 35(3). Under s RC 35(2) the amount is deemed to have been paid on the date on which the instalment so credited was due and payable. Example At 31 March 20X4 Big White Co Ltd has a $4,000 debit in its ICA. On 30 June 20X4 Big White pays $4,400, made up of $4,000 of further income tax and $400 of imputation penalty tax. Big White’s first instalment of provisional tax of $6,000 for 20X4–X5 is due on 28 August 20X4. Big White can offset the $4,000 further income tax paid against the first instalment amount due and will only be required to pay the difference of $2,000 on 28 August 20X4.  Law: IT07 ss OB 69, RC 35  ¶22-227 Offset of provisional tax on application of the personal attribution rules Generally, s RC 34 allows for the transfer of provisional tax overpaid when personal services income may be attributed under s GB 27. See ¶33-345. The overpaid provisional tax may be transferred from the interposed entity to the individual and vice versa. The amounts transferred will be treated as provisional tax paid by the transferee/recipient (not the transferor/donor) for the purposes of the provisional tax rules and use of money interest provisions. See s RC 34(6). In accordance with s RC 34(4) the transfer can be made only on or after the later of: ▪ the day on which the excess provisional tax is paid, and  ▪ the day on which the instalment of provisional tax is due and payable by the person (if the entity is making the transfer) or the entity (if the person is making the transfer). The transfer must be made by notice to the Commissioner within the time allowed for furnishing the transferee’s tax return, or within such time as the Commissioner may allow. The notice must state (s RC 34(5)): ▪ the person to whom the transfer is made ▪ the amount of the transfer, and ▪ the date on which the transfer is allocated. Law: IT07 s RC 34  ¶22-230 Allowance for provisional tax paid by agent A person receives a tax credit for a tax year equal to the amount of provisional tax for the tax year paid by an agent of the person, if the agent is liable to pay provisional tax on behalf of the person. Law: IT07 s LB 2  ¶22-235 Payment of terminal tax If a person’s income tax liability is more than the total of their credits, the difference is the person’s terminal tax. The person must pay the terminal tax to complete the satisfaction of their income tax liability. See s BC 8. Terminal tax must generally be paid by the 7th day of the month specified in sch 3, pt A, column G except where the terminal tax is due in January, in which case it will be due and payable on 15 January. See s RA 13. If the taxpayer has a tax agent with an extension of time arrangement, they have an additional two months to pay their terminal tax (sch 3, pt A, column H). This extension of time applies to all taxpayers who have a tax agent, not just those taxpayers who are provisional taxpayers. Law: IT07 ss BC 8, RA 3, RA 13, RB 1  ¶22-240 Provisional tax to be credited in payment of income tax Provisional tax is to be credited in payment of income tax and is subject to the same treatment as income tax in relation to overpayments. Law: IT07 s LA 6, LB 2  USE OF MONEY INTEREST ¶22-350 Use of money interest and provisional tax overview Use of money interest applies to any underpayment or overpayment of provisional tax on each of the applicable instalment dates, and in addition to any late payment penalty that  may apply. Use of money interest generally runs from the first instalment date, except in the case of safe-harbour taxpayers and, with effect from 1 April 2017, interest concession provisional taxpayers. From 1 April 2017, use of money interest generally runs from the last instalment date for interest concession provisional taxpayers. Use of money interest does not apply to AIM provisional taxpayers. Interest rates are set by Order in Council, amending the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Regulations 1998. See rates listed at ¶50-083. From 8 May 2020 the interest rate charged by Inland Revenue on unpaid tax is 7%. The rate for overpayments of tax is 0%.  ¶22-352 Use of money interest (UOMI) Use of money interest applies to all provisional taxpayers (except new provisional taxpayers, safe-harbour taxpayers, interest concession provisional taxpayers, and AIM provisional taxpayers) from their first provisional tax instalment date. Use of money interest also applies to new provisional taxpayers from their first instalment date after the first business day in terms of s RC 9(9) (unless the instalment is in a transitional year: see below). Note that a new provisional taxpayer is defined in the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) as a person who has an initial provisional tax liability as described in s YA 1 (see ¶22-115). For the current interest rates, see ¶50-083. Interest concession provisional taxpayers With effect from 1 April 2017, for most standard method provisional taxpayers (and, before 1 April 2019, some estimation method provisional taxpayers who fell within s 120KBB), use of money interest will only apply from the date of the final instalment of provisional tax. Because the last instalment date falls after a taxpayer’s balance date, it is expected that a taxpayer should be able to make a payment at the third instalment date that covers their residual income tax for the year and they will therefore have no use of money interest charge for the year. Example 1: Wooley Shearers Limited (Wooley) provides shearing services to farmers. The company has difficulty estimating its provisional tax for the year as it charges by the weight of the wool and the amount of income derived depends on the growing rate of the sheep. In the 2017 income year, Wooley has residual income tax of $260,000. Wooley has filed its 2017 tax return before the first instalment of provisional tax and decides to pay its 2018 provisional tax using the standard method. This will require it to pay three instalments of $91,000, which it does on the respective dates. However, because of ideal wool-growing conditions, Wooley has a standout 2018 year and at the end of the year Wooley calculates its residual income tax as $390,000. This means that Wooley should have paid instalments of $130,000. Under the old rules, Wooley will be charged UOMI on the difference between the instalments calculated by reference to its residual income tax and what it paid, being $39,000 ($130,000 − $91,000) for each instalment until the amount of the underlying tax and UOMI is paid. However, the new rules in s 120KBB will apply to Wooley because it paid its first two instalments based on the standard method on time, and assuming all the other requirements of s 120KBB are met. UOMI will still apply to Wooley because it has underpaid its tax at the final instalment date. However, it will only apply from that date on the difference between Wooley’s residual income tax for the year and the amount paid to the final instalment date.  This means UOMI will be charged on $117,000, being the difference between $390,000 and $273,000, from the final instalment date until the underlying tax and applicable UOMI is paid. Example based on examples in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 39–40.  When a taxpayer pays all of the required instalments under the standard method for the tax year (other than the last one) on or before the relevant instalment date, the amount of their residual income tax for that year less the amount already paid will be due on the last instalment date for that year. Use of money interest will therefore only apply on that amount from the final instalment date until the tax and any applicable UOMI are paid. If the amount is paid on the final instalment date, no use of money interest will be payable. Example 2: Wooley again uses the standard method in the 2019 income year and under that method is required to make 3 instalments of $136,500 ((105% of $390,000)/3). It makes the first two instalments on time but just before the due date for the third instalment Wooley calculates that it has had another spectacular year and its residual tax liability for the year is actually $650,000. This means it should have made instalments of $216,667. Wooley decides not to pay the final instalment based on the standard method amount but rather makes a payment based on its estimate of its final tax liability for the year. Wooley makes a payment of $377,000 on the due date for the final instalment. When Wooley completes its tax return for the 2019 year it calculates its final tax liability for the year as $655,000. As Wooley has underpaid its tax for the 2019 income year it will be charged UOMI. Because Wooley has made all its instalments (other than the final instalment) using the standard method, and assuming all the other requirements of s 120KBB are complied with, Wooley will only be charged UOMI from the date of the final instalment until the tax and any UOMI is paid on $5,000, being the difference between Wooley’s residual income tax and the amount paid ($655,000 − 600,000). Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 40.  When a taxpayer fails to pay any of the required instalments under the standard method for the tax year (other than the last one) on or before the relevant instalment date, interest will apply to the failed instalment. Use of money interest will apply on the lowest of the following amounts: ▪ the standard instalment amount due minus the amount actually paid, or ▪ one-third (or one divided by the number of instalments if the number is not three) of the taxpayer’s residual income tax minus the amount actually paid. Example 3: Thomas Water Finders Limited (TWFL) is a consulting firm that provides consulting services to the agricultural sector in the use of beavers to assist in water irrigation for farmers in drought affected areas. TWFL has a March balance date. As beavers are not yet permitted into New Zealand, a lot of TWFL’s time is spent lobbying the Government to permit the introduction of beavers to New Zealand. Once the Government permits introduction of the rodents to New Zealand TWFL expects its income earning to skyrocket as farmers see the benefits that using beavers as natural irrigators can have, based on experience in Nevada where beavers are used to provide natural irrigation. In the 2018 income year TWFL had residual income tax liability of $55,000. Because of the uncertainty of the future of this innovative irrigation method, TWFL decides to use the standard method to pay provisional tax for the 2019 income year. It calculates it is required to make three instalments of $19,250 ((105% × $55,000)/3). TWFL pays its first instalment on time but between the first and second instalment dates the Government approves the introduction of beavers for irrigation schemes in New Zealand and TWFL’s workload increases dramatically. Because of this TWFL forgets to make its second provisional tax instalment.  At the date of the third instalment, TWFL realises it has missed the second instalment and also calculates that because of the massive increase in consulting revenue its year-end tax liability is expected to be $1,250,000. TWFL want to minimise the impact of UOMI and so, on the final instalment date, the company makes a payment of $1,231,239 based on the estimate of its final tax liability. This is made up of the tax owing of $1,230,750 and $489 for UOMI on the second instalment. When it completes its tax return, TWFL calculates its final tax liability as $1,250,000, as it expected. Because TWFL did not make its second instalment on time it cannot use the concessionary rule in s 120KBB(2) for the missed instalment but instead must use the rule in s 120KBB(3) in relation to the missed instalment. This will require the company to pay UOMI on the lesser of: (a) 1 divided by the number of instalment dates for the income year multiplied by its residual income tax less the amount paid in relation to the instalment ((1/3 × $1,250,000) − 0 = $416,667); or (b) the amount the company is liable to pay in accordance with the standard method for that particular instalment ($19,250). The lesser of these amounts being (b), TWFL will be charged UOMI on $19,250 from the due date of the second instalment until the date that the tax and applicable UOMI is paid, which was the date of the third instalment, being $489. TWFL may also be subject to late payment penalties. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 41.  Where, during an income year, a taxpayer has instalments they pay and a failed instalment, the result will be that no UOMI will apply to the non-failed instalments, but it will apply to the failed instalment. Where the rule in s 120KBB applies, the Commissioner is also not liable to pay use of money interest on overpayments before the final instalment date. Criteria to use concessionary interest rule To be able to use the new calculation rules: ▪ the taxpayer must not be a safe-harbour taxpayer ▪ the taxpayer must be an “interest concession provisional taxpayer” (being a person liable to pay provisional tax who uses one of the standard uplift methods, or, before 1 April 2019, who used the estimation method for the last instalment but a standard uplift method for earlier instalments) ▪ all “provisional tax associates” are either □ interest concession provisional taxpayers □ use the GST ratio method to calculate provisional tax, or □ use the estimation method and have elected to carry back a loss under s IZ 8, and ▪ there must be no provisional tax interest avoidance arrangement. A provisional tax associate for these purposes will be, for person A: ▪ if person A is a company, another company in the same wholly-owned group of companies, or another person that has a voting interest or market value interest in person A of 50% or more  ▪ if person A is not a company or is a company acting as a trustee, another person who is associated with person A, treating s YB 3 of the Income Tax Act 2007 as requiring 50% voting interests and market value interests instead of 25%. In both cases, the aggregation rules in s YB 3(3) and (4) will be ignored. Note that the definition of provisional tax associate does not apply to two natural persons. The definition will essentially capture wholly-owned group companies and those who have, directly or indirectly, a 50% or greater share in a company. A “provisional tax interest avoidance arrangement” means an arrangement involving the manipulation of one or more amounts of residual income tax, including a zero amount of residual income tax, with the purpose or effect of defeating the intent and application of the interest provisions. AIM provisional taxpayers Taxpayers who adopt the accounting income method (AIM) for calculating provisional tax are generally not liable for use of money interest. Provided they have made the payments as calculated by their AIM-capable accounting system, they will not have any use of money interest exposure should the year-end residual income tax result in a different tax liability. If a taxpayer pays less than what the AIM-capable accounting system calculates, then use of money interest will be imposed between the time of underpayment and terminal tax date. These rules apply providing the taxpayer has not engaged in a provisional tax interest avoidance arrangement. It is expected that taxpayers who use AIM will either no longer have terminal tax liabilities (as their tax payments will be made in near real-time, and based on actual results), or have very small variations to their tax liability for the year. Note that no interest is payable by the Commissioner on any refunds of overpayments of AIM instalments. See s 120VB of the TAA. Safe-harbour taxpayer No use of money interest is payable by a safe-harbour taxpayer, unless that person fails to meet his or her terminal tax obligations. See s 120KE(1) and (2) of the TAA. Standard method provisional taxpayers To qualify for the safe harbour a taxpayer (including non-individuals) must satisfy the following requirements: ▪ have paid the instalments required under the standard method for the tax year or have no obligation to pay provisional tax for the year because their RIT for the preceding year was $5,000 or less (for the 2019–20 and earlier years, $2,500 or less) ▪ have current year RIT of less than $60,000 ▪ have not estimated their RIT or used a GST ratio, and ▪ not have a provisional tax interest avoidance arrangement. The taxpayer’s residual income tax will then be due and payable in one instalment on their terminal tax date.  Example 4: Leroy is a provisional taxpayer for the 2018 income year who uses the standard method. He is required to make three instalments of $10,000 during the year, which he does on the applicable due dates. When Leroy completes his tax return he discovers that his residual income tax for the year is $57,000. He has underpaid his provisional tax for the year. However, because Leroy has paid all three instalments on the due dates, his residual income tax is less than $60,000, he has not estimated or used the GST ratio method and there is no provisional tax avoidance arrangement in relation to Leroy, s 120KE(1) will deem his residual income tax to be due and payable in one instalment on his terminal tax date. He will not have any UOMI exposure until that date.  Example 5: Shoshanna is a provisional taxpayer for the 2018 income year. Under the standard method she is required to make three instalments of $10,000 on 28 August 2017, 15 January 2018 and 7 May 2018. She makes the following payments during the year: 28 August 2017 — $9,000 15 January 2018 — $8,000 7 May 2018 — $28,000. When she completes her tax return for the year Shoshanna calculates she has a residual income tax of $45,000. Because Shoshanna did not make the required payments under the standard method on the instalment dates, she is not able to use the safe harbour and will be subject to UOMI and may also be subject to late payment penalties on the same basis. Examples from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 46–47.  GST ratio method provisional taxpayers In addition, a GST ratio method provisional taxpayer who applies the GST ratio to determine his or her provisional tax payments for the whole year will be safe-harboured from use of money interest if his or her provisional tax payments fall short of the year-end liability. See s 120KE(3) and (4). If the taxpayer elects out of the GST ratio method after the first instalment, he or she will be required to estimate his or her provisional tax liability and will be subject to use of money interest. No entitlement to interest Note that neither a safe-harbour taxpayer nor a GST ratio method provisional taxpayer will be entitled to receive use of money interest if he or she overpays provisional tax during the year. Tolerance for small underpayments A retrospective amendment, made in March 2020, inserted s 120KF with effect from 1 April 2017 for the 2017–18 and later income years. The section includes a tolerance to allow taxpayers to retain the benefit of the safe harbour even if they have underpaid by a small amount. It provides that despite a provisional taxpayer underpaying an instalment by $20 or less, the taxpayer is treated as paying the instalment in full for the purposes of the safe harbour in s 120KE. Transitional year In a transitional year (see ¶22-120), interest applies to any unpaid tax in relation to the instalments payable in the months set out in sch 3, pt B. See ¶22-012. The date interest starts is the day after the day on which payment of the instalment is due under s RC 21.  The amount of each instalment is the proportion that the instalment period bears to the length of the transitional year. The final instalment is the income tax liability for the transitional year less any amounts due on earlier instalment dates. The difference between these deemed amounts and the amounts actually paid by the taxpayer is subject to use of money interest, unless the taxpayer is a safe-harbour taxpayer and not a new provisional taxpayer. See s 120KD of the TAA for statutory guidelines and an example of the interest calculation. Voluntary payments The provisions ensure that where a taxpayer makes a voluntary payment of provisional tax, he or she will receive interest from the day after the date of payment. This ensures that interest is paid even where the payment is made before the first provisional tax instalment date. Transfer of overpaid tax A key issue in relation to transfers of excess tax is the effective date of transfer, because the effective date has an impact on the transferee’s liability for use of money interest on underpayments of tax. The tax transfer rules set out the effective date of a transfer of excess tax (which depends upon the relationship between the transferor and transferee) and remove the confusion that has previously surrounded this issue. For more details, see ¶2-148 and ¶22-140. Tax pooling Taxpayers may continue to pool their provisional tax payments with other taxpayers to reduce their exposure to use of money interest on underpaid tax and to increase interest on overpaid tax. For more details, see ¶22-365. Death of a taxpayer A person’s death will not result in additional use of money interest being charged in the tax year in which death occurs, so long as all of the deceased’s provisional and terminal tax payments are made by due date. See s 120C(1) definition of “date interest starts” para (f). Law: IT07 ss RC 9(9), RC 18, YA 1; TAA ss 3(1), 120C, 120KB–120N, 120VB, 120VC  ¶22-354 Application of use of money interest The general rule is that payments made by a taxpayer for a return period are applied first to the payment of accrued interest and then to unpaid tax. When there is more than one amount of unpaid tax, payments are applied to the oldest debt within a period first. See s 120F of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The section contains the following illustrative example: On 1 September 2019, an assessment of $100 tax to pay is raised for the 2018–19 tax year. This amount incurs $5 use of money interest. On 1 September 2020, a reassessment of $120 tax to pay is raised for the 2018–19 tax year along with an additional amount of $3 UOMI. The taxpayer pays the balance of $128. Payments are applied against the $5 UOMI (ie interest on the earliest unpaid amount), then against the $100 tax. Next, payments are applied against the $3 UOMI on the $20 tax to pay, then against the $20 tax.  Note that special ordering rules previously applied when a payment was made before the third instalment date to reduce an amount of unpaid provisional tax. See former s 120L(2) and (3). Instead of being applied first to interest, the payment was applied to provisional tax due on an instalment date of the Commissioner’s choice or on an instalment date specified by the taxpayer. These provisions were designed to ensure that use of money interest was applied on a simple, rather than a compounding, basis on outstanding provisional tax payments — the original policy intent. In effect, a taxpayer could “stop the clock” on use of money interest when he or she made a top-up payment. However, note that for payments made after the third instalment date, payments would be apportioned to use of money interest before the core tax, as for the usual payment allocation rule. However, retrospective amendments were made in March 2020 to remove the ability for taxpayers to allocate their provisional tax payment to particular instalments and to require the Commissioner to allocate payments to the oldest outstanding provisional tax instalment: s 120L(2). The amendment applies from 1 April 2018 for the 2018–19 and later income years but excluding payments that have been applied before 27 June 2019 (the introduction of the relevant amending legislation). With effect from 1 April 2020, for the purposes of s 120L, “provisional tax” includes late payment penalties charged in relation to the provisional tax. Interest on overpayments of provisional tax The Commissioner may apply interest payable to a taxpayer towards payment of the taxpayer’s unpaid tax on or after the date on which the taxpayer furnishes a tax return. See s 120F(2). Law: TAA ss 120F, 120L  ¶22-355 Cancellation of interest Use of money interest may be cancelled where a notice of assessment is issued stipulating a new due date for payment of the unpaid tax. In this case, interest may be cancelled for the period from the date of the notice until the new due date, providing the unpaid tax is paid by the date specified. See s 183C(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). If the assessment is issued before the original due date for tax and stipulates interest payable for a period before the date of assessment, a 30-day grace period is allowed. During this period, the taxpayer can effectively pay the amount stated on the assessment (and any interest accumulated up to the date of the issue of the assessment) and not be charged interest. The 30-day grace period is terminated at the end of the 30 days or the due date for the tax, whichever is the earlier. See s 183C(3). To give taxpayers some certainty about how much they owe, interest for the period between the dates of issue of a statement of account and when the payment is made can be cancelled if the payment is made within 30 days of the statement being issued. The 30day, interest-free grace period applies only in respect of statements of account issued after the original due date for payment of the tax to which the statement relates. See s 183C(4) and (5). When both a notice of assessment and a statement of account have been issued and the grace periods overlap, the interest for the period starting the day after the date of the  notice of assessment and ending on the date of payment will be cancelled, provided payment is made within the 30-day grace period relating to the issue of the notice of assessment. For this purpose, “payment” means payment of the tax assessed and any interest payable before the date of the assessment. See s 183C(5) and (6). Use of money interest may also be cancelled in terms of s 183E in cases where the underlying tax is remitted. Note that in August 2018, Inland Revenue released a standard practice statement, SPS 18/04, “Options for relief from tax debt” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 9, October 2018 at 37). This statement updated and replaced the previous statement, SPS 15/02, from 22 August 2018. The statement summarises the Commissioner’s practice when considering options for removing or deferring the obligation to pay tax, interest and/or penalties. START tax types The current configuration of Inland Revenue’s FIRST system has an extremely complex process for tracking the issue of statements and the calculation of UOMI to be cancelled. This often results in taxpayers being left with an overpayment of interest that must be transferred or refunded. The long-term solution under the new START environment is to move to a monthly billing cycle where UOMI will only be charged at the same date every month, eliminating the need for the current 30-day rule. A transitional solution has been put in place to deal with the situation in the period until all taxes are migrated to START. Amendments to s 183C provide that when a taxpayer receives a statement relating to a “START tax type”, no UOMI will be charged between the date of the statement and the date of payment of all the tax, penalties and UOMI charged on that statement if that date is within 30 days of the issue of the statement. The only time the rule will not apply is when the liability to tax is increased, in which case the 30-day period will reset. The following are currently included within “START tax type”: ▪ income tax ▪ GST ▪ WFF tax credits ▪ tax credits under s 41A (charitable gifts) ▪ FBT ▪ RWT ▪ NRWT ▪ approved issuer levy ▪ RLWT ▪ gaming machine duty ▪ income tax liability of certain PIEs  ▪ PAYE ▪ employees’ child support deducted by employers ▪ student loan repayment deductions ▪ KiwiSaver deductions ▪ employer KiwiSaver contributions ▪ ESCT, and ▪ RSCT. Emergency event interest remission A taxpayer affected by an emergency event may ask the Commissioner for a remission of use of money interest. The definition is based on the definition of an emergency in s 4 of the Civil Defence Emergency Management Act 2002. Remission is permitted only if: ▪ the taxpayer has sought relief, and paid the underlying tax, as soon as practicable, and ▪ the Commissioner is satisfied that remission is equitable. The 4 September 2010 and 22 February 2011 earthquakes in Christchurch are an example of a situation classified as an emergency event entitling taxpayers to seek remission. Relief for these taxpayers was provided for by the Tax Administration (Emergency Event — Canterbury Earthquake) Order 2010 (SR 2010/307). An Order in Council for an emergency event may relate to events that have already occurred. Any such Order expires (unless renewed) at the end of six months after the Order is promulgated or the end of the period specified in the Order. The Canterbury Earthquake Order was originally scheduled to expire on 31 March 2011 but was extended by an amending order to 30 September 2012 following the major aftershock on 22 February 2011. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 183C, 183E  ¶22-356 Interest on provisional tax included as income Interest payable by the Commissioner on overpaid provisional tax is income to the recipient. See ¶5-281. The Commissioner may deduct resident withholding tax from gross interest paid on overpaid tax in accordance with that regime: see ¶15-040. The Commissioner may also apply interest against any unpaid tax not paid by the relevant due date. See s 120F of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and ¶22-354. Law: IT07 s CC 8  ¶22-360 Non-charging of interest on provisional tax  Taxpayers are not liable to pay late payment penalties, use of money interest or both in respect of unpaid tax of $100 or less. See s 183F(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Conversely, the Commissioner is not liable to pay interest on overpaid tax of $100 or less. Law: TAA s 183F  ¶22-365 Provisional tax pooling Provisional tax pooling is intended to give taxpayers an opportunity to reduce their exposure to use of money interest (UOMI) on underpaid tax and to increase interest received on overpaid tax. The system first took effect on 1 April 2003. Generally, under provisional tax pooling, taxpayers make payments to an authorised intermediary who manages underpayments and overpayments on the participating taxpayer’s behalf. Actual payment of the taxpayer’s provisional tax liabilities is made by the intermediary. Underpayments of tax will be offset against overpayments within the same pool. The pooling regime allows one taxpayer to pool payment with those of another taxpayer, even when the parties are not associated persons. Compared with the UOMI rates paid or charged by Inland Revenue (IR), the intermediary should be able to pay a higher rate of interest to taxpayers who have overpaid their tax into the pool and charge a lower rate of interest to those who have underpaid their tax into the pool. In practice, the concept would seem to benefit larger taxpayers where the sums involved are higher. Accounting income method (AIM) provisional tax payments are excluded from the tax pooling provisions. Tax pooling is intended for circumstances where a taxpayer faces uncertainty, whereas AIM is based on known amounts. Tax pooling is still available for AIM taxpayers for year-end tax disputes or terminal tax payments. Deposits When making a deposit to a tax pooling account, the intermediary must electronically notify IR of the name, tax file number and the amount of the deposit for each provisional taxpayer, in accordance with s RP 18. In the event these details are not supplied within five working days, IR is required to refund the deposit. When IR receives a deposit and the required notice, confirmation of receipt must be provided to the intermediary. The principal amount of a payment made to an intermediary for deposit in a tax pooling account is held by the intermediary in trust for the taxpayer until the principal amount is: ▪ credited to an account of the taxpayer with the Commissioner ▪ credited to an account of another taxpayer with the Commissioner, that other taxpayer being a client of the intermediary ▪ refunded to the taxpayer ▪ transferred at the taxpayer’s request to another intermediary, or ▪ transferred at the intermediary’s request to another intermediary.  Application of the use of money interest regime Generally, the UOMI provisions apply to an intermediary operating a tax pooling account. A deposit in a tax pooling account is treated as tax paid by the intermediary for the purpose of calculating use of money interest. There are specific definitions of “date interest starts” and “tax paid” in calculating UOMI for these taxpayers. See s 120C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The relevant provisions are ss 120A, 120AA and 120C–120I. These provisions impose interest liability on a taxpayer for underpaid tax and on IR for overpaid tax. In essence these sections apply as if the intermediary were the taxpayer: s 120OD of the TAA. UOMI on an amount deposited in a tax pooling account (with IR) accrues to the intermediary from the date of deposit to the date the deposit is refunded or there is a transfer under s RP 19. The interest is payable to the intermediary on the date the deposit is credited to another account with the Commissioner or the date the deposit is refunded by the Commissioner. For the purpose of calculating this interest (and for no other purpose) the amount deposited into a tax pooling account is treated as tax paid by the intermediary: s 120OE of the TAA. A deposit transferred to an intermediary, whether at the request of the taxpayer or another intermediary, retains its pre-transfer deposit date. Where IR is required to refund a deposit to a tax pooling account because the intermediary has not provided the requisite details for the deposit, no interest will be payable by IR on that deposit. See s 120C(1)(e) of the TAA. Transfers for certain expected tax liabilities Section RP 19B enables a taxpayer to purchase tax for expected income tax or provisional tax liabilities before a return is filed for a tax year. However, for an income tax liability, taxpayers must have filed all returns for prior years, or for a provisional tax liability, they must have met all their provisional tax obligations for the tax year, and the backdated effective date of the tax pooling transfer is limited to the tax year in which the funds are used. Any excess tax purchased may only be refunded, transferred forward to a future tax year or transferred to another tax type obligation but without backdated effect. Use of tax pooling funds and voluntary disclosures Funds in a tax pooling account may be used for provisional tax, other than under AIM, and terminal tax. If a person chooses to use funds to satisfy a provisional tax or terminal tax obligation, funds can also be used to satisfy the person’s liability for interest on that provisional or terminal tax. See s RP 17B(2)(e). Note that funds may also be used for an increased tax amount that arises when a previously assessed liability is increased, or arises as the result of a voluntary disclosure or audit for non-assessable tax types, for which returns were previously filed, and includes increased amounts of tax resulting from the resolution of a tax dispute that is subject to challenge proceedings, including a dispute that was stayed pending the outcome of a similar case. See s RP 17B(3). Funds can also be used to satisfy a person’s liability for interest on an increased amount of tax. See s RP 17B(2)(d). For the purpose of satisfying an obligation for provisional tax or terminal tax, members from the same group of companies may use tax pooling deposits made or purchased by another member of the same group. See s RP 17B(4)(c) and (4B).  Time limit for transfers for provisional or terminal tax In general, the time limit in which to complete a tax pooling purchase to meet provisional and terminal tax obligations, or interest on that provisional or terminal tax, is 75 days after the terminal tax date. See s RP 17B(4)(a). However, the limit is 76 days after the terminal tax date if the taxpayer’s balance date is at the end of October, November or December and the terminal tax date falls in a year containing a 29 February date. In addition, no time limit applies to the use of funds deposited on the taxpayer’s behalf under s RP 18 (the person’s own funds) provided the required tax return has been filed on time. See s RP 17B(4)(b) and (c). Note that the time limit to meet an obligation for an increased amount of tax, or interest on that increased amount of tax, is only 60 days from the date the Commissioner issues the notice of assessment. See s RP 17B(5). COVID-19 variation On 11 June 2020, the Commissioner released a COVID variation, COV 20/05, “Variation in relation to s RP 17B(4) of the Income Tax Act 2007 to extend time for tax pooling transfers” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 7). This variation applies to a person who wished to use funds in a tax pooling account to satisfy an obligation for provisional tax or terminal tax for the 2019 tax year. The variation recognised that the impact of COVID-19 meant that some taxpayers who would otherwise have made use of tax pooling had been unable to do so due to cashflow difficulties. For the 2019 income year, the time within which a request had to be made was extended from 76 days to 365 days after terminal tax date under s 6I of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The variation was subject to the two conditions that required a contract with a tax pooling intermediary to be in place on or before 21 July 2020, and that the person’s business had to have experienced, or have been expected to experience, a significant decline in revenue as a result of COVID-19. Revenue types for which tax pooling can be used The meaning of “increased amount of tax” and “deferrable tax” includes an amount relating to: ▪ tax paid or payable under the PAYE, ESCT, RSCT, RWT or NRWT rules ▪ income tax, GST, FBT, further income tax and imputation penalty tax payable under s 140B of the TAA. See ss RP 17B(8) and YA 1 “amount of tax”. See further at Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 35. Law: IT07 ss RP 17–RP 21; TAA ss 120C, 120OD, 120OE, 124O–124X  PARTNERSHIPS Introduction to partnerships  ¶23-010  Limited Partnerships  ¶23-020  Taxation of General and Limited Partnerships ¶23-030 Taxation of Limited Partnerships  ¶23-080  General Taxation Principles for Partnerships  ¶23-100  Assignment of Interest  ¶23-160  Partnerships and Imputation Regime  ¶23-182  Livestock Valuations  ¶23-187  ¶23-010 Introduction to partnerships “Partnership” is defined to include a group of two or more persons who have, between themselves, the relationship described in s 8(1) of the Partnership Law Act 2019. The Partnership Law Act defines a “partnership” as “the relationship that exists between persons carrying on a business in common with a view to profit”. The income tax treatment of partners in a partnership is comparatively straightforward and is codified by a set of rules in subpart HG of the Income Tax Act. Subpart HG contains rules that apply to both limited partnerships and general partnerships. The key difference between partnership taxation and company systems of taxing small businesses is that gross partnership income is attributed directly to the owners, whereas companies attempt to achieve this indirectly by dividend imputation. “Private use” transactions in partnerships are addressed by an apportionment of deductions, whereas companies adopt an FBT regime for shareholder-employees and a dividend regime for other shareholders.  Whether a general partnership (ie one that is not a limited partnership) exists is a question of fact to be determined in light of all the surrounding circumstances. Consequently, the existence or absence of a normal written partnership agreement is not conclusive evidence as to the existence of a general partnership. The fact that one or some of the partners work actively in the partnership business does not of itself preclude the conclusion that a partnership exists as between all the partners. The fact that only one partner has initially introduced capital into the partnership does not prevent there being a partnership if, for example, there is: ▪ the existence of a bank account into which receipts are banked and out of which expenses are paid ▪ the registration of a business name in the joint proprietorship of the partners ▪ drawings against profits ▪ a structure presented to outside parties, ie notification to the public, particularly suppliers and customers, and ▪ joint leasing or ownership of business premises. Partnerships may be terminated by the expiry of a set time, by mutual agreement, by the giving of notice or on the grounds set out in the Partnership Law Act. Whichever method is used, a partnership may not be dissolved or created with retrospective effect. See Rowe (B and HG) v FC of T 82 ATC 4243. As a matter of practice, however, the Commissioner is prepared to backdate recognition of a partnership in some cases. This is when the partnership deed merely evidences an existing partnership arrangement established by verbal arrangement and the deed is executed within 12 months of commencement of the partnership. New legislation The Partnership Law Act 2019 was enacted in 2019 and came into effect on 21 April 2020. The new Act is a revision Act and is not intended to change the effect of the law. The purpose of the Act is to reenact the Partnership Act 1908 in an up-to-date and accessible form.  Some minor amendments to clarify Parliament’s intent or reconcile inconsistencies are included in sch 2 of the new Act. The Partnership Law Act applies to every partnership regardless of when it was formed. Law: IT07 s YA 1; PL s 8(1)  LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS ¶23-020 Background to limited partnerships The Limited Partnerships Act 2008 came into force on 2 May 2008, creating a new legal entity in New Zealand called the limited partnership. The Act was accompanied by codified tax rules for both limited and general partnerships that came into effect on 1 April 2008. The limited partnership rules to some extent replaced the older special partnerships rules that were repealed with effect from 2 May 2008.  ¶23-022 Key features of limited partnerships Separate legal identity and flow-through tax treatment A limited partnership is a separate legal person, having a separate legal personality from its partners. This makes it more akin to a company. However, a limited partnership is also a flow-through entity for New Zealand income tax purposes (ie losses and gains are attributed to the partners directly). As a result, it is anticipated that limited partnerships will be the preferred investment vehicle for foreign venture capital investors because they will allow investors to limit their exposure to liability while at the same time providing a flow-through tax mechanism in relation to gains and losses, allowing them to recognise those gains or losses in their home country. The partners A limited partnership must have at least one general and one limited partner who is not the same person. Any “person” can be a partner in a limited partnership including natural persons, companies, partnerships and other unincorporated bodies.  General partners manage the business and are liable for the debts and obligations of the partnership (their role closely resembles the directors in a company). Limited partners are usually passive investors and are only liable for debts of the partnership to the extent of their capital contribution (their role closely resembles the shareholders of a company). A general partner has the authority to bind the limited partnership and is an agent of the partnership. A general partner may also, but does not have to, make a capital contribution to the partnership. Each general partner is jointly and severally liable with the limited partnership and any other general partners for the debts and liabilities of the limited partnership. A general partner may choose to limit its liability by incorporating (ie the general partner may be a company). The partnership must have at least one general partner that satisfies the “resident requirement”. This means all limited partnerships must have at least one general partner who is: ▪ a natural person who lives in New Zealand ▪ a limited partnership that has one or more general partners who are natural persons who live in New Zealand ▪ a partnership governed by the Partnership Law Act 2019 that has one or more partners who are natural persons who live in New Zealand ▪ an overseas company registered under the Companies Act 1993 that has one or more directors who are natural persons who live in New Zealand ▪ a company. Note that for the first four bullet points above, the requirement will also be met if the relevant person lives in one of a number of prescribed countries and is a director of a company that is registered in that country. A general partner must also not be disqualified from being a general partner under s 19A, which refers generally to persons prohibited from  being a director, promoter, or otherwise taking part in the management of a company under the Companies Act, Financial Markets Conduct Act, Takeovers Act, or equivalent overseas legislation. A limited partner is prohibited from taking part in the “management” of the partnership. Schedule 1 to the Limited Partnerships Act 2008 lists the activities that do not constitute taking part in the management. These “safe harbour activities” can be broken down into two broad categories: ▪ activities relating to strategic or otherwise significant decisions in the limited partnership (eg varying the partnership agreement), and ▪ actions taken in a different capacity (eg acting in the capacity of a director or shareholder of a general partner that is a body corporate). Limited partnership agreement A limited partnership must have a written partnership agreement that governs the affairs of the partnership and the conduct of its business. On registration of the partnership with the Registrar of Companies, the agreement acts as a contract between the limited partnership and the partners.