 or natural disaster ▪ to improve the economy of a country that is on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) list of countries receiving development assistance ▪ to raise the educational standards of a country that is on the OECD’s list of countries receiving development assistance. The Commissioner is required to maintain and publish a charities list for student loan scheme purposes. The list must include the date from which each charity’s listing applies and the date of de-listing, if applicable. The list can be found on the Inland Revenue website. A borrower who is treated as physically present in New Zealand under this exemption will have to provide the Commissioner with details of their adjusted net income (income other than from salary or wages) for each tax year, see sch 1 cl 11. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 25(1)(b), 27A–27E, sch 1  ¶8-135 Exemption for student loan borrower for unexpected delay overseas To be eligible for the exemption for unexpected delays overseas, the borrower must: ▪ have been resident during the time in question ▪ provide proof of his or her intended return to New Zealand, and  ▪ provide proof that, if the borrower had returned to New Zealand as intended, the borrower would have been New Zealand based. In addition, the borrower will need to: ▪ provide evidence of the unexpected delay that resulted in him or her not being able to return to New Zealand as intended, and ▪ provide evidence that the unexpected delay was due to an event or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the borrower (for example, an airline strike, personal illness, a fire, an explosion or act of war). Law: SLSA 2011 s 25(1)(c), sch 1  ¶8-140 Exemption for student loan borrower for unplanned absence from New Zealand For an exemption to be granted because of an unplanned absence from New Zealand, the borrower must: ▪ have been a New Zealand resident during the time in question ▪ provide proof of the duration of the unplanned personal absence from New Zealand, and ▪ provide evidence that the unplanned personal absence was due to an event or circumstances beyond the borrower’s reasonable planning and control (eg illness or death of a family member who is overseas or the borrower’s employer requiring the borrower to attend a conference overseas). Law: SLSA 2011 s 25(1)(d), sch 1  ¶8-145 Exemption for student loan borrower for absence from New Zealand for employment or occupation  A borrower making application for an exemption because of an absence from New Zealand for reasons of employment or occupation must: ▪ have been a New Zealand resident during the time in question ▪ have a permanent place of abode only in New Zealand ▪ provide evidence that he or she receives either □ a PAYE income payment derived from New Zealand, or □ income from a business that has a permanent place of business in New Zealand, and ▪ provide evidence that the majority of his or her personal absences from New Zealand are because of his or her employment or occupation. Law: SLSA 2011 s 25(1)(e), sch 1  ¶8-150 Exemption for accompanying wife or husband, civil union partner or de facto partner of student loan borrower For the exemption to be granted for reasons of absence to accompany the borrower’s wife or husband, civil union partner or de facto partner, the borrower must: ▪ have been a New Zealand resident during the time in question ▪ provide evidence of his or her relationship with the person that he or she accompanied ▪ provide evidence that his or her personal absence from New Zealand was because he or she was accompanying his or her wife or husband, civil union partner or de facto partner (partner), and  ▪ provide evidence that one of the following applies: □ the borrower’s partner was personally absent from New Zealand in the service in any capacity of the Government of New Zealand or because he or she was working as a volunteer or for token payment for a charity (see ¶8-130) □ the borrower’s partner satisfies the conditions for an exemption for an absence for reasons of employment or occupation (see ¶8-145), or □ the borrower’s partner satisfies the conditions for an exemption for an absence for reasons of studying overseas (see ¶8-155). Law: SLSA 2011 s 25(1)(f), sch 1  ¶8-155 Exemption for study at post-graduate or undergraduate level overseas A borrower making application for an exemption from the 183-day personal presence requirement for being absent because of full-time post-graduate or under-graduate studies overseas must: ▪ provide the Commissioner with a document from the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) verifying that the borrower’s course is at post-graduate or under-graduate level for the purposes of the exemption ▪ provide the Commissioner with evidence from the borrower’s overseas education provider verifying that he or she is enrolled full-time in the post-graduate or under-graduate course verified by the NZQA, and ▪ supply the Commissioner with all other information that the Commissioner may reasonably require to establish whether the exemption applies.  Borrowers enrolled in a course of study with a New Zealand tertiary education provider who are undertaking full-time study overseas as part of their New Zealand qualification may also make an application for exemption where the study: ▪ is undertaken as part of either a formal exchange programme approved by the New Zealand Government or a formal agreement between a New Zealand tertiary education provider and an overseas tertiary provider, or ▪ is equivalent to level 8 or above on the NZQA Register and cannot be completed in New Zealand. Borrowers obtaining an exemption under these provisions will have to provide the Commissioner with details of their adjusted net income (income other than from salary or wages) for each tax year, see sch 1 cl 11. From 21 February 2017, the exemption for borrowers studying overseas includes recipients of New Zealand Government-funded scholarships who are studying full-time overseas or undertaking approved internships. The borrower must receive a qualifying government-funded scholarship for the study or the internship and must undertake the study or internship on a full-time basis (unless the internship is combined with study, in which case the internship may be part-time). The borrower must provide evidence from Education New Zealand that they are receiving a qualifying government-funded scholarship in respect of the study or internship. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 25(1)(g)–(ib), 176, sch 1  ¶8-160 Student loan borrower may challenge refusal to grant exemption If the Commissioner refuses to grant an exemption, s 176 specifies the borrower may challenge that decision on the grounds that: ▪ the decision is not fair and reasonable  ▪ for the exemptions listed in sch 1 cls 2–10, the decision that the conditions for the exemption have not been satisfied is erroneous ▪ the specified start and end dates for the period that the borrower is treated as being physically present in New Zealand are not fair and reasonable or they are erroneous ▪ any specified conditions that must be met for the borrower to be treated as being physically present in New Zealand are not fair and reasonable or they are erroneous. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 25(1)(a)–(i), 176, sch 1 cls 2–10  TRADING STOCK Introduction to the current trading stock rules ¶9-001 Trading stock and effect on net income  ¶9-002  Trading Stock Definitions  ¶9-005  Valuation of Trading Stock  ¶9-020  Transfers of Trading Stock  ¶9-065  ¶9-001 Introduction to the current trading stock rules Trading stock is property that a person who owns or carries on a business has for the purpose of selling or exchanging in the ordinary course of the business. For any business, especially manufacturers, distributors or retailers, the method chosen to record and value trading stock on hand at year end has a major impact on the bottom-line profit. See ¶9-002. Rules for the valuation of trading stock effectively require trading stock to be valued as at the end of each income year. The objective is to require the recognition, for income tax purposes, of the fluctuation in value for the income year of the trading stock maintained by a business. This is achieved by treating: ▪ the value of trading stock at the end of the income year as income, and ▪ the value of trading stock at the start of the following income year as an allowable deduction. The trading stock value at the start of the following income year is the same as the closing value at the end of the prior year, that is, a common value applies.  This chapter looks at the role trading stock plays in calculating net income, the types of products making up trading stock and the methods that are available to value it. Features of the current trading stock rules are: ▪ the valuation of trading stock by persons other than low-turnover traders, either at cost or at market selling value (only if lower than cost) ▪ the use of financial reporting standards to value stock at cost ▪ replacement price and discounted selling price may be used to approximate cost if those methods are used by the taxpayer for financial reporting purposes ▪ obsolescence is a factor in the market selling value calculation rather than being the subject of a separate set of rules ▪ simpler trading stock rules for low-turnover traders, ie persons (including associates of the person) with turnover of less than $3m ▪ an exemption from the trading stock rules for persons with a turnover of not more than $1.3m in an income year, and ▪ the valuation of shares, options or other excepted financial arrangements is to be at cost only. Subpart EC applies to value livestock unless it is held as trading stock in which case subpart EB will apply (see ¶27-235). Impact of COVID-19 virus on valuation of trading stock Note that as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Commissioner stated she would allow a late 2020 stock take, provided it was carried out as soon as practicable and no later than 31 May 2020. The 2020 closing stock figure needed to be reconstructed by adjusting for post-balance date sales and purchases, ie those made between balance date and the late stock take date.  Example Wiremu’s Home Appliances Ltd sells and repairs kitchen appliances. It has a standard balance date of 31 March. At the end of the 2020 income year, the company was required to value its trading stock. However, as a result of COVID-19, it had to shut down its business and was unable to undertake the stock take on 31 March 2020. On 28 April 2020, the company reopens its business and undertakes a late stock take. It has kept a record of all amounts of post-balance date sales and purchases. Using the cost valuation method, it adjusts the late stock take figure (to reconstruct what would have been the amount of closing stock at the end of 2020), by adding back the cost of post-balance date sales and deducting the cost of post-balance date purchases. Example from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 23 April 2020  Law: IT07 subpart EB  ¶9-002 Trading stock and effect on net income Before a taxpayer can calculate net income or net loss for their business for an income year, the amount of the cost of goods sold during the year must be determined. This is arrived at by using the following formula: opening stock + total purchases in the year − closing stock = cost of goods sold. For tax purposes, the cost of goods sold takes into account the trading stock held at the beginning of the year and the purchases made during the year, but it does not include the trading stock on hand at the end of the year. Year-end trading stock instead becomes part of the cost of goods sold in the following year (as opening stock). Only by using this formula can the person properly match the year’s sales with the cost of those sales. The trading stock rules reflect this approach. These rules apply to the trading stock of any person who owns or carries on a business. The value of trading stock at the beginning of the year (opening value) is treated as a deduction for that income year. The value of the trading stock at the end of the income year (closing value) is income for the year. The difference between the two is taken into  account in calculating the net income or net loss for that income year. Example: A company buys up old washing machines and refrigerators and renovates them for resale. For the 20X4 income year, it had opening stock of $40,000 (as at 1 April 20X3) and closing stock of $65,000 (as at 31 March 20X4). Its annual sales came to $90,000 and it spent $30,000 acquiring old units, $35,000 on renovation and labour, and $2,000 on new parts during the year. The amount to be taken into account when calculating the company’s net income or net loss for that year is as follows: $ Sales  $ 90,000  less cost of sales: opening stock  40,000  purchases  30,000  direct labour  35,000  parts  2,000 107,000  less closing stock  (65,000) 42,000  Amount to be included in net income for the year  48,000  The value of opening stock is the same as the closing stock value at the end of the previous income year. In the above example, the value of opening stock (or opening book value) in the 20X4–X5 income year would be $65,000. Closing stock will increase net income for the year and some taxpayers may be tempted to value closing stock at its lowest possible value. Because closing stock must be valued using one of the four prescribed methods, opportunity for such tax planning is limited. See s EB 4. Income from closing stock and deductions from opening stock are allocated to an income year under ss BD 3 and BD 4. Income is  allocated to the income year it is derived and deductions are allocated to the income year they are incurred. Under s EB 23 a person with turnover of less than $1.3m in the income year need not value trading stock at year-end if it can be reasonably estimated that the person has less than $10,000 worth of trading stock. Law: IT07 ss BD 3, BD 4, CH 1, DB 49, EA 1, EB 1, EB 3, EB 4, EB 23  TRADING STOCK DEFINITIONS ¶9-005 Trading stock defined There are several different definitions of “trading stock”, each of which applies according to the particular part or provision of the Income Tax Act 2007 being considered. The definition that generally applies for the Act, particularly for subpart EB (with the exception of s EB 24), is found in s EB 2. The definition is inclusive, which means that it does not try to set out an exhaustive list of what is and what is not “trading stock”. For trading stock valuation purposes, “trading stock” is property that a person who owns or carries on a business has for the purpose of selling or exchanging in the ordinary course of business. It includes: ▪ work in progress or partly completed work that, if completed, would be trading stock ▪ materials that the person has for use in producing trading stock ▪ property on which expenditure is incurred that would be trading stock under the categories above if possession of it were taken, or ▪ property leased under a hire purchase agreement when that property is treated as having been acquired by the lessor under  s FA 15 and is an asset of a business carried on by the lessor (this category applies to lessors only). Ordinary course of business The trading stock definition provides an express link between items held in the ordinary course of business and a business undertaking. The effect is that an asset is trading stock only when it is an asset in which the person’s business deals or trades. An asset held on revenue account (eg an asset acquired with the purpose of resale) is not trading stock simply because the owner of the asset happens to carry on a business. This part of the definition was deliberately added to prevent any possible argument that an asset acquired by a person who is not in the business of trading in that asset could also be treated as trading stock. Although services form part of inventory under NZIAS 2 Inventories, they are not trading stock for income tax purposes. The following items are excluded (see s EB 2(3)) from the general definition: ▪ consumable aids ▪ spare parts not held for sale or exchange ▪ depreciable property ▪ an excepted financial arrangement that a life insurer has ▪ an excepted financial arrangement held by a person if s CX 55 (proceeds from disposal of investment shares) applies to the income on disposal of the excepted financial arrangement ▪ livestock not used in a dealing business ▪ land ▪ a financial arrangement subject to the financial arrangements rules or the old financial arrangements rules  ▪ an emissions unit, and ▪ a greenhouse gas unit that is not an emissions unit (prior to 30 November 2020, a non-Kyoto greenhouse gas unit). A number of other definitions relevant to trading stock valuation under subpart EB include: ▪ closing stock ▪ cost ▪ financial statements ▪ generally accepted accounting practice ▪ low-turnover trader, and ▪ turnover. There is also a separate definition of “trading stock” in para (b) of the s YA 1 definition that applies for the following provisions of the Income Tax Act: ▪ s CG 6 (receipts from insurance, indemnity, or compensation for trading stock) ▪ s EB 24 (apportionment on disposal of business assets that include trading stock) ▪ s FB 13 (trading stock — relationship property transfer) ▪ ss GC 1–GC 3 (disposals below market value). Trading stock is also further defined in s GC 1 for that section to include an interest in trading stock. See ¶9-087. A further definition of “trading stock” can also be found in s EZ 48 for the old financial arrangements rules. Romalpa clauses  Trading stock purchased subject to a Romalpa or reservation of title clause would most probably be trading stock for tax purposes. This is because the definition requires the stock to be “held for the purpose of selling or exchanging in the ordinary course of business”. A legal title to, or full ownership of, the stock is not required. Provided the stock is in the person’s possession, and the other part of the definition is met, the stock will be trading stock for tax purposes. Quick reference — defining trading stock Item  Satisfies trading stock criteria Reference  Land  No, but may be revenue account property if it would produce income on disposition.  ¶9-008  Leases  Yes, where the right to possess a personal property asset is given in consideration for a lease payment.  ¶9-009  Crops  Yes, if severed, eg grapes harvested from the vines. No, if standing crop, eg grapes are still on the vine.  ¶9-010  Consumable aids  No, if they are held to be used as part of the manufacturing process without becoming a component part of the finished product.  ¶9-011  Containers, packages, labels  Yes, these items are incorporated into the final product and are regarded as stock in trade.  ¶9-012  Quick reference — defining trading stock Item  Satisfies trading stock criteria Reference  Spare parts  Yes, if the spare parts are held for sale or exchange. No, if the parts are held for the maintenance of plant and equipment used for production.  ¶9-013  Shares  Yes, if the holder is in the business of trading in shares, ie held on revenue account. No, if the shares are held on capital account.  ¶9-060  Work in progress  Yes.  ¶9-015  Law: IT07 ss EB 2, YA 1  ¶9-006 Trading stock and low-turnover traders There is a low compliance cost option for a person when the total of the turnover of the business and the turnover of associated persons for the relevant income year is $3m or less. The threshold of $3m is a minimum amount which can be increased by Order in Council. Turnover is the total income derived by a business in an income year from trading (ie sales) excluding the value of closing stock. The focus on income derived by a particular business means that the question of whether a person is a low-turnover trader is to be considered on a business-by-business basis. Example: Bill owns two businesses. One is in its first year of operation and has a small turnover of less than $500,000. The second business is that of international share trader and  has a turnover in excess of $3m. There are no associated persons involved with Bill in respect of either business. Bill is a low-turnover trader for the purposes of trading stock tax treatment of the new business.  Before concluding that a person is a low-turnover trader, the question of associates must be carefully considered to see whether turnover from their combined business activities tips the $3m threshold. If the threshold is not tipped, all the associated persons are low-turnover traders. The test of association is that provided for in ss YB 2 and YB 3. Briefly, this means that persons are associated only when companies have at least 50% common ownership or a person has at least 25% ownership of a company. High-turnover traders The term “high-turnover traders” is not a statutory term but is often used to describe a taxpayer whose turnover (including that of any associated persons) exceeds the $3m threshold in an income year. Law: IT07 s EB 13  ¶9-008 Land as revenue account property Land is excluded from the definition of “trading stock” in s EB 2. The definition in this section applies generally for the Income Tax Act 2007, including the trading stock valuation provisions in subpart EB and the matching regime in s EA 2. However, land may be revenue account property. Special matching rules apply to revenue account property. A deduction for the cost of such property must be allocated to the earlier of the income year in which the property is disposed of and the income year in which the property ceases to exist. Revenue account property is defined as trading stock or property that would produce income for the person on disposition. Land will be revenue account property if its disposition will give rise to an  amount of income, for example, when it is acquired by a dealer or developer. The matching rules in s EA 2 will therefore apply to land when it is revenue account property. This tax treatment provides a similar result to the approach taken by the courts for matching purposes, which in effect treated land held on revenue account as if it were trading stock, even though the trading stock definition expressly excluded land. Note also that land whose disposal would produce income under any of the land taxing provisions is expressly included within trading stock for specific provisions of the Act, namely s CG 6 (receipts from insurance, indemnity, or compensation for trading stock), s EB 24 (apportionment on disposal of business assets that include trading stock), s FB 13 (trading stock — relationship property transfer) and ss GC 1–GC 3 (disposals below market value). Example 1: Land purchased by a property developer was held to be a purchase of trading stock. While the relevant trading stock provisions did not apply to require the land value to be taken into account at the end of the year, the Taxation Review Authority found that the taxpayer should have shown the value of the land as an asset in its financial accounts. See Case M111 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,712.  Example 2: The above decision was confirmed by the High Court in Murray Darnill Ltd v Taxation Review Authority (No 2) (1994) 16 NZTC 11,126. The effect of excluding land from the relevant trading stock provisions was to deny the trading stock valuation options from being available for land. This meant that land could only be valued in the accounts at cost for tax purposes. The exclusion did not mean that land was to be ignored as trading stock altogether as there were other sections, such as s FB 4 of the Income Tax Act 1994 (concerning disposal of trading stock together with other assets of a business) and s GD 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994 (concerning sale of trading stock for inadequate consideration), which provided that the term “trading stock” for their purposes does include land.  Example 3:  The decision in Murray Darnill was referred to with approval in Garwen Holdings Ltd v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,396 at 12,399, where Blanchard J saw no general intention on the part of the Legislature to prevent recognition of a dealer’s land as stock-in-trade. To adopt that approach, as advocated by the taxpayer, would create a glaring accounting anomaly. The same issue was further raised in Thornton Estates Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,577, but it was not necessary for the Court of Appeal to decide the point.  Law: IT07 ss EA 2, EB 2(3)(a)  ¶9-009 Trading stock — leases A lease that is not a finance lease is an excepted financial arrangement under the financial arrangements rules. Excepted financial arrangements that are trading stock or revenue account property must be valued at cost unless a nil value can be justified. See ¶9-060. A lease that is an excepted financial arrangement is, in effect, an agreement under which a lessor transfers to a lessee the right to possess a personal property lease asset in consideration for a personal property lease payment, including a licence to use intangible property, a lease that is two or more consecutive or successive leases that are treated as one lease, a hire or bailment and a sublease. A hire purchase agreement and an assignment of a hire purchase agreement are excluded from the definition of a lease under s YA 1. Law: IT07 ss ED 1, YA 1  ¶9-010 Trading stock — crops Vegetables, trees, soil and minerals are regarded by case law as being part of the land and not trading stock until such time as they are severed from the soil. However, this is not explicit in the current trading stock definition. See Hood Barrs v Commr of IR (No 2) (1957) 37 TC 188 (HL), Saunders (I of T) v Pilcher [1949] 2 All ER 1097, Pasley v C of IR  [1958] NZLR 332, Kauri Timber Co Ltd v C of T [1913] AC 771 (PC), Case T1 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,001. The decisions in Kauri Timber Co Ltd v C of T and Hood Barrs v Commr of IR (No 2) may be compared with the decision of the Privy Council in Mohanlal Hargovind of Jubbulpore v IT Commrs (1949) AC 521; (1949) 2 All ER 652 (PC). In that case, a firm of cigarette manufacturers entered into short-term contracts with the owners of forests in India to pick and remove the leaves of tendu trees which they used instead of paper in making cigarettes. It was held that the taxpayers were merely given a right to pick and carry away the leaves and not an interest in land or in the trees or plants themselves. Their Lordships said that in a business sense the expenditure was: expenditure on revenue account and not on capital account just as much as if the tendu leaves had been bought in a shop. Under the contracts it is the tendu leaves and nothing but the tendu leaves that are acquired. Their Lordships distinguished Kauri Timber Co Ltd v C of T and pointed out that in the present case the trees were not acquired, nor were the leaves acquired, until the taxpayers had reduced them into their own possession and ownership by picking them and that the two cases were not comparable. Therefore, the circumstances of each case must be carefully considered to determine whether what is purchased is: ▪ an interest in land ▪ primarily a right that will provide the purchaser with trading stock, or ▪ primarily a purchase of goods with an ancillary right to obtain possession of those goods. With the adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards, the fair value method under NZIAS 41 Agriculture, instead of NZIAS 2 Inventories, may be required to be used to value harvested trading  stock. Taxpayers that adopt NZIAS 41 must value their trading stock at cost. See s EB 6(1B). Law: IT07 s EB 6(1B)  ¶9-011 Treatment of consumable aids Although the definition of trading stock includes “materials that the person has for use in producing trading stock”, there is a specific exclusion for “consumable aids to be used in the process of producing trading stock”. Consumable aids are not defined for tax purposes but are, broadly, items that are used up in the manufacturing process without becoming a component part of the finished product. For example, the consumable aids of a steel manufacturer might include coal or oil stocks, for the commerce industry, computer paper or stationery and for a farmer, stocks of hay, feed, and fertiliser. Example 1: Chemicals, cleaning fluids and various other articles used in manufacture were consumable aids and not trading stock on the basis that they would not become component parts of finished products and were not goods “purchased for purposes of manufacture”. See Case 115 (1951) 1 TBRD at 573. In addition, at 571, the Chairman of the Board stressed the temporary life of the aid goods: Their nature and functions are such that nearly all of them would be used up, or become unusable and worthless, as the result of being applied once in the manufacturing process and that the others … although capable of a limited repetitive use, have a very short life.  Example 2: Grinding wheels having a life of 9–24 days and furnace bricks having a life of approximately 21/2 weeks were consumable aids and not trading stock. See Case 16 (1968) 4 NZTBR. See also Case E98 (1982) 5 NZTC 59,522.  The tax treatment of consumables differs from the relevant accounting treatment set out in NZIAS 2 Inventories. Purchases of consumable aids are normally allowed as a deduction under the general permission although the timing of the deduction is governed by s EA 3. The timing for a deduction of such expenditure depends on whether the value of stocks of consumable aids exceeds $58,000. If the value is under $58,000, the expenditure incurred in purchasing the consumable aids is claimed in full as a deduction. Effectively, the value of any unconsumed stock of consumable aids at the end of the income year is not required in calculating assessable income provided it has not been capitalised for financial reporting purposes. If stocks exceed $58,000 at balance date, the whole value of these stocks is capitalised as either deferred or prepaid expenditure, or as stocks of consumable aids, ie the unexpired portions of expenditure are added back to income. See Determination E12 and ¶10-056. Example 3: Bigfoot Shoes Ltd purchases 50,000 litres of solvent at a cost of $100,000 during the 20X2–X3 income year. The solvent is for use in shoe manufacturing. At the end of the income year drums containing 30,000 litres of solvent (with a cost of $60,000) remain unopened. The entire cost of the solvent is allowed as a deduction in the 20X2–X3 income year as expenditure on a consumable aid. However, because the unexpired portion of the solvent is $60,000, and therefore greater than $58,000, the unexpired portion of $60,000 must be included as income in the 20X2–X3 income year. The $60,000 becomes deductible in the 20X3–X4 income year but, if the timing rule for prepayments applies again in that year, further income will be derived on the unexpired portion.  Under the trading stock rules, consumable aids form part of the costs allocated by persons valuing closing stock at cost. They represent a part of the cost of putting the trading stock in its present location and condition. See ¶9-025. However, consumable aids are excluded from the definition of trading stock for tax purposes. What this means in practice is that persons who comply with NZIAS 2 Inventories for financial reporting purposes must include the cost of consumable  aids as income for tax purposes under s EA 3 regardless of the amount held at the end of the year. Determination E12 will not apply as the cost of the consumable aids has been capitalised for financial reporting purposes. See example 3 in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 12, December 1998 at 25–26. If the costs of consumable aids have previously been claimed as a deduction, any insurance proceeds subsequently received for lost or damaged consumable aids will be income. The Commissioner has released interpretation statement, IS 14/03, “Income tax — consumable aids” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 6, July 2014 at 26). The statement outlines what a consumable aid is, how the expenditure on consumable aids is deductible, when expenditure on consumable aids needs to be added back under s EA 3 and how Determination E12 applies to consumable aids. Law: IT07 ss EA 3, EB 2(3)(g)  ¶9-012 Trading stock — containers, packages, labels In contrast to consumable aids, containers, packages, labels and similar materials are incorporated in the final product and are regarded as stock in trade. See Case 115 (1951) 1 TBRD. This would appear to be confirmed by s EB 2(2)(b). This provision refers to material held by the person for use in producing trading stock. Law: IT07 s EB 2(2)(b)  ¶9-013 Trading stock — spare parts Spare parts may be held for two purposes: ▪ as replacement elements for items of trading stock, or ▪ for the maintenance of plant and equipment.  The first category falls within the trading stock definition in s EB 2(2). Other spare parts are excluded from the definition when those parts are not held for sale or exchange, see s EB 2(3)(h). An example of this is spare parts held for plant maintenance purposes. These spare parts are included in inventory under NZIAS 2 Inventories. Example: Stocks of spare parts and stores were held not to be part of stock in trade: however, it had first been held that a loss on the destruction of stocks of spare parts and stores was a capital loss and not allowable as a deduction. Dixon J thought that when the spare parts were issued and taken into use their cost should be debited to running costs. See Guinea Airways Ltd v FC of T (1950) 83 CLR 584.  Normally, the time to claim a deduction, as in a case of the purchase of consumable aids, is the year in which the expenditure on the purchase was made. Spare parts are either depreciated or subject to the timing rule for prepayments in s EA 3 and added back as income. Law: IT07 ss EA 3, EB 2(2), (3)(h)  ¶9-015 Trading stock — work in progress Work in progress is included in trading stock, with the same principles and requirements to be met as when valuing trading stock. For example, to a manufacturer, work in progress will be the value of partially completed trading stock, to a service provider it is the value of work yet to be billed and to a building contractor it is the value of labour and materials yet to be billed to the customer. The same costing methods applicable to finished goods will be applied to the cost of work in progress. Law: IT07 s EB 2(2)(a)  VALUATION OF TRADING STOCK ¶9-020 Methods for valuing closing stock  Tax is calculated on a taxpayer’s net income amount. Therefore, by minimising the value of trading stock on hand at year-end, the deduction for cost of goods sold is maximised and the resulting tax liability reduced. However, opportunities for increasing deductions are now limited because closing stock must be calculated using prescribed methods and these methods must be consistently applied. See s EB 3(1). The standard valuation methods for valuing closing stock are: ▪ cost (see ¶9-030, ¶9-025, ¶9-035), or ▪ discounted selling price (see ¶9-040), or ▪ replacement price (see ¶9-050), or ▪ market selling value (see ¶9-055 and ¶9-056). Obsolete stock must also be valued under these rules. These rules do not apply to excepted financial arrangements (s EB 3(3)), eg shares that are to be valued at cost under ss ED 1 (see ¶9060) and ED 2 (see ¶9-065), unless they are written off as worthless. In the case of livestock, except for livestock used in dealing operations, the valuation methods are set out in s EC 3. Taxpayers may use more than one valuation method to value their closing stock. They may use a cost valuation method for some stock and a market selling valuation for other stock that has a value less than cost. Taxpayers may also use more than one cost valuation method to value closing stock. However, the Commissioner generally expects that they will apply the same cost valuation method to groups of similar or related items of trading stock. For example, a manufacturer might use cost to value most stock and discounted selling price for stock sold in a factory shop. The cost valuation methods used must be consistent with those adopted for financial reporting purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 12, December 1998 at 22. Law: IT07 ss EB 3, EB 4  ¶9-025 Cost-flow methods for valuing trading stock items When purchases are made at various prices during the year and some, but not all, of that trading stock remains on hand at year-end, the question is how to value the cost of that trading stock. The choice of method, or cost-flow assumption, is particularly important for tax purposes because it affects the closing value of trading stock and, consequently, the amount of income to be returned. The trading stock rules allow two methods for assigning such costs. They are: ▪ first-in first-out (FIFO) method, and ▪ weighted average cost method. First-in first-out is a method that deems stock to be disposed of in the same order as it is purchased. Closing stock is therefore valued at the cost of the most recent purchases. Under the weighted average method, cost is computed by averaging the amount at which stock is brought forward at the beginning of the income year with the cost of stock acquired during the year. Consumption of stock during the year is deducted at the average cost of stock so ascertained. In times of rising price levels this method can result in a relatively high value compared to current costs on a falling market, and a relatively low value in a rising market. When an item of trading stock cannot be separately identified, or it is an excepted financial arrangement, one of these methods must be applied to ascertain the cost of items included in closing stock. Taxpayers may elect to apply one of these methods to trading stock that can be separately identified. Consistency  All persons are subject to consistency requirements in respect of cost-flow methods. For a low-turnover trader, the cost-flow method chosen must be applied consistently from year to year. For other persons, the cost-flow method used by the person in assigning costs to closing stock must be the same as the method used in the financial statements for the income year. Joint products and by-products Joint products and by-products are not referred to in subpart EB. Taxpayers should apply generally accepted accounting practice in such cases. Law: IT07 s EB 7  ¶9-030 Valuing closing stock at cost: high-turnover traders The methods for valuing closing stock (excluding excepted financial arrangements) at cost are set out in ss EB 6–EB 8. For these purposes “cost” means costs incurred in the ordinary course of business to bring trading stock to its present location and condition. Cost includes acquisition costs and costs of production. Storage costs may also be included. See the definition of “cost” in s YA 1. Taxpayers must take into account all costs under generally accepted accounting practice for valuing inventory. These costs must then be allocated to closing stock using methods acceptable under such practice, unless the person uses NZIAS 41 Agriculture to account for trading stock in their accounts (see below). The starting point for determining cost under generally accepted accounting practice is NZIAS 2 Inventories. Where a person uses NZIAS 41 Agriculture to account for trading stock in their accounts, that person must value their closing stock at cost, and include and allocate costs so that their closing stock value is not materially different from the value obtained by applying NZIAS 2 Inventories, ignoring para 20 of NZIAS 2.  The trading stock rules state that a person will not have complied with generally accepted accounting practice if the value of closing stock is materially different from the value obtained by applying the relevant standard. See s EB 6(2). However, it has also been pointed out that by simply applying NZIAS 2 a person will not automatically be regarded as having complied with the requirements of the Act for tax purposes. In most cases, a tax reconciliation will be required for persons who do comply with NZIAS 2. Some of the items that will need to be taken into account include: ▪ any non-material departures from NZIAS 2 that are allowed for accounting purposes ▪ adjustments for non-deductible costs such as holiday pay accruals ▪ adjustments for tax depreciation, and ▪ adjustments that take into account the treatment of consumables and spare parts. Tax treatment for budgeted costs of trading stock Manufacturers or producers of trading stock commonly use a budgeted or standard cost method of cost allocation to trading stock for financial reporting purposes. For tax purposes, any variance between these cost allocations and actual costs of production are pro-rated between the cost of trading stock sold or exchanged during the year and the closing stock. See s EB 8. (The section does not apply to low-turnover traders.) Example: Sticky Buns Ltd values its trading stock at $4.50 per unit using a standard cost system under NZIAS 2 Inventories. In the 20X2–X3 income year, it produces 100,000 units at $5 per unit and sells 90,000 of those units. The variance is: $000  Production costs as per financial reports: 100,000 units @ $4.50 per unit  450  less actual production costs 100,000 units @ $5.00 per unit  500  equals variance  50  The variance is allocated as follows: Cost of trading stock sold: 90,000/100,000 × 500,000 = $450,000 Cost of closing stock: 10,000/100,000 × 500,000 = $50,000 Portion of variance allocated to closing stock: cost of closing stock variance  ×  $50,000  ×  $50,000  × 10%  cost of stock sold cost + cost of closing stock $50,000 $450,000 + $50,000  = $5,000 Value of closing stock: NZIAS 2 + portion of variance = $45,000 (ie 10,000 @ 4.50 per unit) + $5,000 = $50,000 Note: Closing stock for 20X3 = opening stock for 20X3–X4. The value of opening stock is allowed as a deduction under ss EA 1(3) and DB 49(2). The variance may be allocated over goods produced in an earlier income year and sold in a later year.  Trading stock items not separately identifiable and excepted financial arrangements  For trading stock items that are not separately identifiable, either the first-in first-out method or the weighted average cost allocation method must be used to identify: ▪ which items of stock are included in closing stock, and ▪ the cost of those items. The same cost-flow rules apply to excepted financial arrangements. See s EB 7. Even if trading stock can be separately identified, the above cost allocation methods can be adopted. Law: IT07 ss EB 6–EB 8, EB 12  ¶9-035 Valuing closing stock at cost: low-turnover traders Low-turnover traders who choose to value trading stock at cost must value it either under s EB 16, EB 17 or EB 18. Alternatively they may choose to follow NZIAS 2 Inventories as outlined at ¶9-030. Low-turnover traders who manufacture or produce trading stock must include the following costs of production when determining the value of closing stock: ▪ direct and indirect material costs ▪ direct and indirect labour costs ▪ utilities costs (heat, light and power) ▪ costs of repairing and maintaining factory plant ▪ costs of renting factory plant, and ▪ amounts of depreciation loss on factory plant.  Any additional costs of production that have been taken into account in the low-turnover trader’s financial statements must also be included in the cost of closing stock for tax purposes. This must be done every year. If the low-turnover trader acquires trading stock rather than producing it, the direct transport and insurance costs incurred in bringing the stock to its present location and condition must be included. These costs are in addition to purchase price. If a low-turnover trader has turnover of $1,300,000 or less in an income year they may use the value of opening stock as being the value of closing stock, providing they can reasonably estimate that the value of their closing stock for the income year is less than $10,000. See s EB 23. Low-turnover traders who comply with NZIAS 2 when valuing closing stock at cost must comply with the consistency and disclosure requirements of NZIAS 8 Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors. Low-turnover traders who do not comply with GAAP must be consistent from year to year in: ▪ their cost valuation method adopted ▪ their use of market selling value, if it is greater than cost ▪ their use of a cost-flow method of allocating costs (either FIFO or weighted average) ▪ the extent to which they include indirect cost in the cost of trading stock that they manufacture or produce, and ▪ their method of calculating discounted selling price. A low-turnover trader may make changes with respect to the above. However, any changes must be justified by sound commercial reasons (which does not include the advancement, deferral or reduction of an income tax liability) or by another provision of the  trading stock regime. Where a change is made the trader must keep sufficient details of the change and the reasons for it. Law: IT07 ss EB 15–EB 18, EB 22, EB 23  ¶9-040 Discounted selling price for valuing trading stock A person may determine the value of their closing stock at its discounted selling price if they use discounted selling price for their trading stock in their financial statements. In determining discounted selling price a distinction is drawn between retailers and other persons. Retailers: high- and low-turnover traders For a retailer that uses discounted selling price in the retailer’s financial statements, or a low-turnover trader that does not prepare financial statements, discounted selling price is calculated on each department or category of goods as: ▪ the total of the retail selling price of the goods less ▪ the normal gross profit margin calculated under NZIAS 2 Inventories. The normal gross profit margin must also include all costs that are required to be included under the cost method of valuation. See ¶9030 and ¶9-035. Retailers with turnover of $1m or less Under s EB 9(4) there is an exception for retailers with a turnover not exceeding $1m. These traders may determine the discounted selling price of all closing stock by discounting the total of the retail selling prices of the goods by the trader’s average gross profit margin for all closing stock valued at discounted selling price in the income year. In effect, a single gross profit margin is applied to all stock on hand at year-end. The $1m benchmark may be increased by Order in Council.  There is no definition of the term “retailer” in s YA 1. It is used in subpart EB in its ordinary commercial sense. Example 1: A retail sale has been defined as one in small quantities to an ultimate consumer. See Marguerite Leatherwear Ltd v C of IR (1987) 9 NZTC 6,068. This concept of a sale to an end-user who is a consumer was also applied in National Westminster Finance New Zealand Ltd v South Pacific Rent-a-Car [1985] 1 NZLR 646 at 651.  Non-retailers: high- and low-turnover traders The discounted selling price method is available to non-retailers, both high- and low-turnover. See ss EB 9(6) and EB 19(5). The calculation for each category of goods is: ▪ the total market selling values of goods in each category less ▪ the normal gross profit margin for the category of goods. The total cost of goods calculated as part of the normal gross profit margin must include all costs required to be included under the cost method of valuation as appropriate. See ¶9-030 and ¶9-035. Transport and insurance costs for trading stock that is acquired plus any additional costs recorded in the financial statements or for tax purposes must also be included. The normal gross profit margin must be recalculated for each category of goods for each income year. Nursery stock Inland Revenue issued guidelines for the use of discounted selling price (DSP) for the valuation of nursery stock in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 11, November 2001 at 68. Nursery plants have been divided into five categories: Type of stock  DSP value  Bedding plants  58%  House plants and roses  55%  Liners/plugs  52%  Shrubs and perennials  48%  Trees  42%  Mature plants: the DSP of mature plants in each category is calculated by multiplying the selling price of the plant by the DSP value. Example 2: A nursery has 100 mature rose plants on hand at balance date. The nursery sells their mature roses to a retailer for $10 each. The value of that stock for trading stock purposes is $550 (100 plants × $10 × 55%).  Immature plants: the DSP of immature plants is calculated by multiplying the DSP of a mature plant by a ratio of the whole years of completed growth to the number of whole years the plant takes to reach maturity. Example 3: A nursery has 100 12-month-old shrubs and 200 24-month-old shrubs on hand at balance date. The shrubs take three years to mature and sell for $20 each. The value for the purposes of the trading stock rules of the one-year-old plants would be $160 (100 plants × $20 × 48% × 1/3), and the two-year plants would be $639 (200 plants × $20 × 48% × 2/3).  Over-mature plants: the value of over-mature plants or plants past their prime can be calculated by multiplying their revised market value by the DSP value. The revised market value is the actual price at which the grower expects to sell a plant in that condition. In the  event that plants are scrapped and are no longer part of a grower’s business their value for trading stock purposes will be nil. Example 4: A nursery business has 200 mature but frost-damaged Manuka plants at the back of its nursery. Mature plants are normally sold for $30 each. The frost-damaged items are being offered for sale at $20. The value of these plants for trading stock purposes is $1,680 (200 plants × $20 × 42%).  Nursery growers who prefer to calculate their own discounted selling prices are able to do so. However, they must keep records that justify their valuations. Where a taxpayer is not eligible to use the DSP method he or she will have to value their stock at cost (using a cost valuation method) or at market selling value. Law: IT07 ss EB 9, EB 19  ¶9-050 Replacement price for valuing trading stock High-turnover trader Replacement price may be used to value closing stock if it is used in the person’s financial statements. The replacement price of a trading stock item is the market value (exclusive of GST) for the acquisition of the item by the person on the last day of the income year. When no replacement price is available for the last day of the year the last price paid (exclusive of GST) for that item during the income year is taken as the relevant price. See s EB 10. Low-turnover trader A low-turnover trader may apply replacement price to closing stock if: ▪ they do not prepare financial statements, or ▪ they prepare financial statements and determine the value of their closing stock at its replacement price.  The replacement price is: ▪ the market value of the trading stock on the last day of the income year, or ▪ the last price that the low-turnover trader paid during the income year to acquire equivalent trading stock. See s EB 20. Law: IT07 ss EB 10, EB 20  ¶9-055 Valuing closing stock at market selling value: high-turnover traders A high-turnover trader may value closing stock at market selling value when that value is less than cost. However, the market selling value must be backed up by reasonable evidence, such as the offering of goods for a period before and after balance date. If this is not possible then valuation must be made using one of the prescribed cost valuation methods. If there is no active market from which comparisons can be drawn, the person may offer an independent valuation. This must be provided for taxation purposes, that is, using the market selling value definition rather than the net realisable value concept in NZIAS 2 Inventories. Market selling value for an item of trading stock is the amount that a person normally expects to receive from a sale in the ordinary course of business after deducting: ▪ estimated costs of completion, and ▪ expected costs of sale (usually incurred) comprising: □ transportation □ insurance □ sales commissions, and  □ discounts to buyers. The expected costs of sale are deductible by a person who prepares financial statements provided that the costs have been taken into account when calculating net realisable value in the financial statements. See s EB 11(4). A clearance sale is regarded as being in the ordinary course of business. The act of quitting or intending to quit a line to stock will normally arise in the ordinary course of business. The relevant price at which the taxpayer can clear the stock is the market selling value. Discount sales to persons who are not in an arm’s length relationship with the person will not come within this classification, eg cheaper sales made to employees. Similarly, sales held around balance date to establish what would be an artificial sale figure that is lower than usual for tax purposes will not be in the ordinary course of business. Law: IT07 s EB 11  ¶9-056 Valuing closing stock at market selling value: low-turnover traders A low-turnover trader may value closing stock at market selling value whether that value is higher or lower than cost. However, if the value is higher than cost, the trader must consistently use market selling value from one year to the next. It would seem unlikely that a trader would choose to use a value higher than cost (unless there was no alternative) given that closing stock is added to gross income. Market selling value is established in the same way as for highturnover traders, ie the amount normally expected from the sale of the stock less the estimated costs of completion and expected costs of sale (see ¶9-055). Law: IT07 s EB 21  ¶9-060 Excepted financial arrangements held as trading stock  Excepted financial arrangements are financial arrangements that are excluded from the ambit of the financial arrangement rules. An excepted financial arrangement that is held as trading stock or revenue account property must be valued at cost. This category includes shares (other than a share acquired under a share-lending arrangement or a share-lending right), options, short-term trade credits, annuities, insurance contracts, gaming and lottery bets, emissions units and various agreements for the sale or lease of property. See s EW 5 and ¶6-065. A share acquired under a share-lending arrangement, or a share supplier’s share-lending right, is valued at the original cost of the share, determined immediately before the share supplier’s disposal of the share under the relevant share-lending arrangement. See s ED 1(4). This ensures that there is no movement in the value of shares under a share-lending arrangement for trading stock purposes. A share acquired under a taxable bonus issue made on or after 30 March 2017 is valued immediately before disposal at the amount of the dividend (taxable bonus issue), not including any imputation credits attached or withholding tax withheld. See s ED 1(4B). Excepted financial arrangements are trading stock when the asset is part and parcel of the person’s business. For example, a person in the business of share trading would hold shares as trading stock. Alternatively, shares which are bought for resale at a profit may not be classed as trading stock but could meet the definition of “revenue account property” in s EA 2. See ¶5-217. For the valuation of emissions units see ¶9-062. In all other cases, the value must be calculated using the first-in firstout (FIFO) method or weighted average cost method. In the case of shares, these methods apply on the basis of share types rather than across an entire share portfolio, eg where more than one parcel of the same type of shares is held. A trader who complies with generally accepted accounting practice must comply with the consistency and disclosure requirements of  NZIAS 8 Accounting policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors. See s ED 1(6). An excepted financial arrangement held as trading stock may be given a nil value when: ▪ it has no present or likely future market value, and ▪ it has been written off as worthless (eg where shares have been de-listed from the stock exchange). See s ED 1(8). Law: IT07 ss EA 1, EB 3(3), ED 1  ¶9-062 Valuation of emissions units An emissions unit is an excepted financial arrangement (s EW 5(3B)). Income derived from the disposal of an emissions unit is income to a person. See ¶5-228. Emissions units are required to be valued at cost at the end of each income year. Costs must be allocated using the first-in-first-out (FIFO) or weighted average cost method. Businesses that receive emissions units from more than one source (for example, units awarded for carbon capture in a post-1989 forest, and fishing quota emission units) are required to hold the units in separate pools for valuation purposes. This is because different types of emissions units have differing tax treatments. Restrictions apply to which emissions units may be pooled when applying the chosen cost method. No pooling The following types of emissions units may not be pooled with other types for the purposes of cost-flow methods: 1. pre-1990 forest land emissions units relating to pre-1990 forest land, if the holder of the units would derive income, other than exempt income and excluded income, from a disposal of the land without timber  2. post-1989 forest land emissions units 3. forest sink emissions units 4. replacement forest land emissions units 5. fishing quota emissions units, if the holder of the units would derive income, other than exempt income and excluded income, from a disposal of the individual transferable quota to which the units relate 6. pre-1990 forest land emissions units relating to pre-1990 forest land, if the holder of the units would derive no income other than exempt income and excluded income from a disposal of the land without timber 7. fishing quota emissions units, if the holder of the units would derive no income, other than exempt income and excluded income, from a disposal of the individual transferable quota to which the units relate 8. emissions units issued for no consideration to which s ED 1B apply and that have not been assigned a cost. Exception to no-pooling rule Despite the rule above, under s ED 1(5C) emissions units from the first five points above may be pooled together. In addition, emissions units under the sixth and seventh point may be pooled together, if those are the only types of units pooled. Exception to the requirement to value at cost — ss ED 1(7B)(a) and ED 1B Some emissions units are valued at zero at year end. The treatment is specified in ss ED 1(7B)(a) and ED 1B. Certain non-forestry businesses were allocated units without payment (“free” units) under the emissions trading scheme (ETS). These are some of the businesses that faced increased costs as a  result of the introduction of the ETS, whether in the form of a new liability to surrender emissions units under the Climate Change Response Act 2002 (CCRA), or increased costs, eg increased electricity prices. When a person holds emissions units as revenue account property, a value must be assigned to that property at the end of each income year. Certain emissions units have a predetermined value. The following have a value of zero (s ED 1(7B)): ▪ emissions units transferred under Pt 4, subpart 2 of the CCRA for no payment and to which s ED 1B does not apply. The unit has a zero value during the period beginning with the day of the transfer and ending before the end of the income year in which the transfer took place ▪ a forest land emissions unit at the end of each income year ▪ a replacement forest land emissions unit at the end of each income year, and ▪ a fishing quota emissions unit at the end of each income year if the holder of the unit would derive income other than exempt or excluded income from disposal of the individual transferable quota to which the units relate. In addition, emissions units to which the valuation rules under s ED 1B apply (see below) have valuations set by that provision. Valuation of free units The valuation rules for free units that have been allocated and that a business holds at the end of an income year are contained in s ED 1B. Under these rules, income arises from valuing an appropriate number of zero-value units at market value. Section ED 1B applies to units in an income year that: ▪ are transferred for zero price in terms of the Government allocation plan (under ss 80–86F of the CCRA), for a removal activity (under s 64 of the CCRA), by a public authority under a  supplementary agreement to a negotiated greenhouse agreement or by a public authority as a rebate, under a negotiated greenhouse agreement, for an indirect emissions charge, and ▪ have been held continuously from the time of transfer, and ▪ have not been valued at market value under s ED 1B(4)(a) (shortfall for transferred units) or ED 1B(8)(a) (revalued units). Emissions units transferred to the person are valued at zero at the time of transfer if there is no shortfall in earlier income years (see below). See s ED 1B(2). Ordinary concepts of accrual accounting are used to determine the business’s income (defined as “unit entitlement” in s ED 1B(7)). Sections 83 and 85 of the CCRA provide a statutory formula by which the business’s ultimate entitlement to units for the income year can be determined. The formula multiplies some known factors (the prescribed level of assistance and the “allocative baseline” for the specific eligible activity) by the business’s production output for the year to determine the business’s ultimate entitlement to an allocation of units. If the business’s income year does not end on the same 31 December date as an emissions year, two calculations are likely to be required because the prescribed level of assistance changes from one emissions year to the next. These income calculations are likely to be the same as those used for financial reporting purposes. The output of these calculations is a number of emissions units which, when multiplied by the market value of emissions units, is an amount of income. It is likely that the business will have received some emissions units from the Crown during the course of the income year and may still hold some or all of them. Because of the two-step method of allocation, it is unlikely that the business will hold precisely the same number of emissions units as its allocation as described in the previous paragraph.  In the simplest scenario, if the business has not carried forward from a previous year a unit shortfall, s ED 1B(6) and (8) will assign yearend market value to the number of zero-value units held as equal to the unit entitlement determined under s ED 1B(7). If the business holds more zero-value units than the unit entitlement, the excess units are assigned a value of zero (s ED 1B(8)(b)) to be carried forward into the next income year. Example 1: Falling production — excess emissions units allocated A Ltd has a 31 December year-end. In March the Government transfers 150 emissions units to A Ltd. However, because of falling production, its final allocation for the year is only 100 units. It values 100 units at market value at year end and continues to hold the remaining 50 at nil value. These units will either be transferred back to the Government or offset against a future allocation.  If the business holds fewer zero-value units than the unit entitlement (unit shortfall), s ED 1B(9) and (11) effectively create an additional amount of unit value (unit shortfall value), which the business is required to recognise as income by virtue of its addition to the value of emissions units held under s ED 1B(11). The consequences of a unit shortfall in a previous year are dealt with by s ED 1B(3), (4) and (10). Zero-value units received in a year subsequent to a unit shortfall year are first applied to the unit shortfall, by being valued at the market value that applied at the end of the unit shortfall year. Example 2: Rising production — insufficient emissions units allocated B Ltd has a 31 December year-end. In March the Government transfers 100 emissions units to B Ltd. However, because of increasing production, its final allocation for the year is 150 units. It values all 100 units at market value and records an additional amount of income equal to 50 units × market value. In March of the next year, B Ltd receives an additional 50 units, representing the shortfall for the previous year. These 50 units will be assigned a market value equal to the market value of a unit at the end of the previous income year. (The legislation operates to ensure that no double-counting of income occurs because the unit shortfall value is reduced by s ED 1B(10) and so no longer forms part of the s ED 1B(11) adjustment.)  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 88. Law: IT07 ss EB 2(3)(i), ED 1(5B), (5C), (7B), ED 1B, EW 5(3B)  ¶9-063 Emissions units and anti-avoidance Section GC 3B(1) states that s GC 1 applies to a disposal of emissions units as if they were trading stock. Section GC 3B(2) states that s GC 1 will not apply to disposal of an emissions unit if the disposal is: ▪ the surrender of the unit under the Climate Change Response Act 2002, or ▪ the transfer of the unit to the Crown under a permanent forestry scheme (prior to 23 June 2020, a forest sink covenant under s 67Y of the Forests Act 1949), or ▪ the transfer of a forest land emissions unit from the person who received it from the Crown to a person as a party to a forestry rights agreement and as required by that agreement relating to the allocation of income or emissions units between the transferor and transferee. If s GC 1 applies and a unit has been disposed of for less than market value, the vendor will be treated as having derived market value from the disposal and the purchaser will be treated as having paid market value for the unit. Law: IT07 ss GC 1, GC 3B  TRANSFERS OF TRADING STOCK ¶9-065 Valuation of excepted financial arrangements transferred within a group Restrictions are placed on transfer values of excepted financial arrangements that are trading stock or revenue account property  transferred between wholly-owned group companies. These rules aim to stop persons within a wholly-owned group from transferring assets (such as shares) that have fallen below cost between themselves at market value prior to balance date, in effect gaining a deduction for an unrealised loss. The transfer may be by way of sale or other disposition or by distribution. The asset is treated as having been transferred at the cost to the transferor. The rule applies only when the excepted financial arrangement is transferred between two companies that are New Zealand resident on the date of the transfer. The rule does not apply if the transfer of the excepted financial arrangement is made under a share-lending arrangement. See s ED 2(1)(b). Further, if the rule applies, the transfer is not a dividend under s ED 2(4). If the transferee ceases to be a member of the same wholly-owned group of companies, the excepted financial arrangement is treated as having been disposed of and reacquired at its market value at the time the transferee company stops being a member of the group. Refer to s ED 2(3). Law: IT07 ss CD 28, ED 2  ¶9-070 Trading stock transferred within wholly-owned group A concession allows any profit element on the transfer of trading stock between New Zealand resident wholly-owned group companies to be ignored for tax purposes. Section EB 5 allows Company B (the company holding the stock at balance date) to value the stock at the original acquisition cost to Company A. Note that the favourable treatment does not apply to excepted financial arrangements. See ¶9-065. However, it does apply to livestock. See s EC 4. To be eligible for this concession, the following requirements must be met:  ▪ Company A and Company B remain part of the group at the end of the income year and either: □ the income years of Company A and Company B end on the same date, or □ they end on different dates and the Commissioner has approved both dates as corresponding to the end of a business cycle and as necessary to prevent material distortion of the net income that would occur if the income years ended on the same date. ▪ The trading stock must have been held at all times from the time it was originally acquired until the end of the relevant income year within the group by a New Zealand resident member (whether or not that company originally acquired the trading stock). ▪ Company B (holding the trading stock at year-end) and Company A (which originally acquired the trading stock) must remain members of the same wholly-owned group at the end of the income year. Where Company A and Company B cease to be members of the same wholly-owned group of companies, Company B is deemed to have sold the trading stock at market value and immediately repurchased it at the same price. See s EB 5(3). A classic example of when this adjustment will occur is upon the liquidation of the other company. The consideration for both the disposition and the reacquisition is the market value prevailing at the time the companies cease being wholly-owned group companies. If the stock’s market value cannot be determined separately from other property, the market value at the date of acquisition by Company B is used. Any profit or loss arising on the sale of trading stock is only realised for tax purposes when the trading stock is transferred to an entity outside the wholly-owned group of companies. Law: IT07 ss EB 5, EC 4  ¶9-071 Trading stock transferred to shareholder Where a company transfers trading stock to a shareholder or an associated person of a shareholder, the transfer occurs at market value for both the transferor and the transferee. Law: IT07 ss CD 6, FC 1, FC 2  ¶9-085 Disposal of trading stock on sale of a business When trading stock is sold in the ordinary course of a business, s CB 1 applies to include amounts derived from the sale in the income of the person. However, when trading stock, or a share or interest in trading stock, is disposed of outside the ordinary course of business, or to put an end to the business or a part of it, amounts received from that disposal are included in assessable income under s CB 2. The person receiving the trading stock is deemed to have acquired it at the same consideration. A disposal is widely interpreted to include an exchange, gift or distribution under a will or on intestacy, but does not include a disposal under any of ss FC 3–FC 8 (which relate to distributions after death) that is not at market value. Unless the parties expressly agree otherwise, the date of disposal (and hence the income year in which the consideration is derived) will be determined according to the relevant statutory presumption in s 146 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017. In short: ▪ if unconditional contract for goods that are specific and in a deliverable state — the date the contract becomes unconditional ▪ if the vendor must do something to make the goods deliverable or the vendor must weigh, measure or test the goods to ascertain the selling price — the date such action is completed and the buyer is notified ▪ if goods are delivered to a buyer on “sale or return” or similar terms — the time at which the buyer signifies their approval or retains the goods without notifying rejection within an agreed or reasonable timeframe  ▪ if unascertained or future goods are sold by description — when the goods are in a deliverable state and unconditionally appropriated to the contract by either party with the assent of the other. See public binding ruling BR Pub 14/08, “Income tax — timing of disposal and derivation of income from trading stock” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 10, November 2014). The ruling applies for an indefinite period from the start of the 2014– 15 income year. Apportionment Section EB 24 deals with the consideration attributable to trading stock when it is disposed of together with other business assets. The section also applies where an interest in trading stock is disposed of with other business assets, or an interest in those assets, irrespective of whether there is a recipient of the trading stock. It should be noted that for s EB 24 an expanded definition of trading stock applies: see ¶9-087. The total amount received on disposal must be apportioned between the trading stock and the other assets to reflect their respective market values. The amount so apportioned to the trading stock is deemed to be the price paid for the trading stock by the purchaser. For s EB 24, a disposal includes a transfer of trading stock under a relationship property settlement. Refer to s EB 24(5). In addition, a disposal of timber includes the creation or grant of a right to take timber, and the disposal of land with standing timber, except to the extent the timber is ornamental or incidental trees, timber subject to a forestry right or timber subject to a profit à prendre granted before 1 January 1984. See s EB 24(4). Law: IT07 ss CB 2, EB 24  ¶9-087 Trading stock — non-market transactions Sale for inadequate consideration  Subject to limited exceptions noted below, trading stock, or an interest in trading stock, that is sold or otherwise disposed of for no consideration or for less than market value is treated for tax purposes as having been sold at market value on the date of disposal. This deemed market value is income to the seller and is treated as expenditure to the purchaser. See s GC 1. This provision does not apply to the disposal of trading stock under a relationship agreement. It also does not apply to certain donated trading stock (see below) or to shares transferred between a share user and a share supplier under a share-lending arrangement. See s GC 1(5). In Foodstuffs (Wellington) Co-operative Society Ltd v C of IR (2010) 24 NZTC 23,959, the High Court confirmed that the market value of shares (held as trading stock) that were cancelled on amalgamation was income of the shareholder, and that s GC 1 applied to the transaction. Section GC 2 provides that s GC 1 also applies to the following disposals as if they were disposals of trading stock: ▪ the grant (other than in favour of the grantor) of a right to take timber, or ▪ the sale or other disposal of land with standing timber on the land, other than a disposal subject to a right in favour of the seller to take timber, unless the extent the standing timber is: □ trees that are ornamental or incidental □ trees in a crop subject to a forestry right registered under the Land Transfer Act, or □ trees subject to a profit à prendre granted before 1 January 1984. In addition, the inclusion of an interest in trading stock within trading stock under s GC 1(4) does not apply if the disposal is of land with standing timber, subject to a right to take timber (s GC 2(3)).  It should be noted that the definition of “trading stock” is expanded for ss CG 6, EB 24, FB 13 and GC 1–GC 3 to include: ▪ anything produced or manufactured ▪ anything acquired for the purposes of manufacture or disposal ▪ livestock ▪ timber ▪ a right to take timber ▪ land whose disposal would produce income under any of ss CB 6–CB 15, and ▪ anything for which expenditure is incurred and that, if possession of that thing were taken, would be trading stock. The expanded definition of “trading stock” in s YA 1 specifically excludes financial arrangements to which the financial arrangements rules or the old financial arrangements rules apply. Trading stock taken for own use or consumption In February 2014, Inland Revenue released “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 14/01: “Income tax — adjustments for trading stock (including raw materials) taken for own use or consumption” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 3, April 2014 at 73). The item considers the situation where trading stock is taken by a sole trader for their own use or consumption. While referring to sole traders, the Commissioner considers the same principles apply to partners in a partnership. The item concludes that a sole trader is required to account for any items of trading stock taken for own use or consumption at the market value of the trading stock. This represents a change in practice and is contrary to two earlier publications to the extent that the item requires an adjustment at market value rather than at cost.  The taking of trading stock for own use or consumption means the trading stock has not otherwise been sold in the normal course of the sole trader’s business. As a result, the sole trader has not derived assessable business income from disposing of the trading stock. However, the costs incurred in acquiring, growing or manufacturing the trading stock would have been included in the sole trader’s deductible business expenses. Therefore, an adjustment to the sole trader’s assessable business income is needed to reflect the fact the sole trader has taken some trading stock. This adjustment is provided for in s GC 1. The item states that the market value at which the trading stock needs to be accounted for is the amount the particular trading stock would have fetched in the relevant market or markets in the ordinary course of the sole trader’s business. Therefore, this amount will also reflect normal business decisions to clear or exit stock lines for a variety of reasons, including seasonal factors, end of shelf life, and fashion or technological changes. In the case of raw materials, there may not be a ready market into which the raw materials are usually sold from which a market value can be ascertained. The Commissioner accepts that in most cases the next best way of estimating market value is to look at the value at which those raw materials are being traded in an arm’s length transaction in other markets. This is likely to be the market in which the sole trader acquired the raw materials. That is, the next best way of ascertaining market value in this situation is to use the current replacement price of the raw materials. The item also confirms that taking trading stock for own use or consumption is a disposal for s GC 1 and that the mutuality principle (that a man cannot make a profit by trading with himself) does not apply to override the clear words of the legislation that require an adjustment at market value. Relationship agreements There is no deemed disposal at market value under s GC 1(5) when a transfer of trading stock is made to a person under a relationship agreement. In such a case, the price is determined under s FB 13.  Donated trading stock There is no deemed disposal at market value under s GC 1 if trading stock is donated or supplied for consideration that is worth less than its market value if the donation or supply is for use in a farming, agricultural or fishing business affected by a self-assessed adverse event (ie drought, fire, flood or some other natural event, or disease or sickness of livestock that materially affects the business) as long as the transferor and transferee are not associated. Law: IT07 ss FB 13, GC 1, GC 2, YA 1  DEDUCTIONS Background to deductions  ¶10-010  General Principles  ¶10-016  Specific Outgoings  ¶10-110  ¶10-010 Background to deductions An amount is a deduction if it is allowed as a deduction under Pt D: s BD 2. This directs attention to whether a provision in Pt D authorises a deduction for the outgoing in question. Deductions are a component of the calculation of taxable income. If a person’s annual total deductions for a tax year exceed the annual gross income, the difference is a net loss for the year (and net income for the year if income exceeds deductions): s BC 4. From net income, a deduction is made for any available tax loss to arrive at taxable income for the tax year. Not all taxpayers are allowed a deduction for expenses that promote the receipt of assessable income. For example, a non-resident deriving dividends, interest and royalties may be denied any deductions, as would an employee who incurs expenses in earning income from employment. Once it is ascertained that an expenditure or loss is allowed as a deduction, the timing of that deduction must be resolved. A deduction is allowed in the income year in which the expenditure or loss is incurred unless a provision in Pt D to I provides to the contrary. See further at ¶10-040. The sections in Pt D are classified into three kinds of provision. The categories, and their effect, are: ▪ the general permission: a provision expressed in general terms authorising the deduction of an expenditure or loss, including a  depreciation loss, incurred in deriving assessable income or in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable income ▪ the general limitations: six provisions, any one of which, if applicable to an expenditure or loss, prevents deduction of the outgoing under the general permission ▪ supplements to the general permission: provisions which address the deduction for specific outgoings and, in the course of doing so, state how the supplement operates in relation to the general permission and the general limitations. The general permission is considered at ¶10-021. The general limitations are described at ¶10-071–¶10-085. The supplements to the general permission are set out in topical format in several subparts to Pt D. The more common items are in subpart DB, followed by more specialist regimes. The more common outgoings are outlined beginning at ¶10-110. There is an interaction between the three categories. In ascertaining whether a deduction is allowed under the general permission, the potential application of any of the general limitations and the supplements to the general permission must also be considered. Law: IT07 s BC 4, BD 2, BD 4  GENERAL PRINCIPLES ¶10-016 Interaction of the deductions rules Several propositions are stated in s DA 3 to clarify the relationship between the general permission, the general limitations and the supplements to the general permission. To understand the propositions, it is necessary to be aware of the general limitations. The general limitations are defined at ¶10-071–¶10-085. Perhaps the most common one is the capital limitation. This is the rule that no deduction is allowed for an expenditure or loss to the extent to which  it is of a capital nature. The relationship between the general permission, the general limitations and the supplements to the general permission may be illustrated by including reference to the capital limitation. The first proposition is that a provision in Pt D may supplement the general permission. In that event, the general permission need not also be satisfied: s DA 3(1) and (2). Example 1: A gift of money may be allowed as a deduction to a company: s DB 41. That section “supplements the general permission”. A deduction becomes allowed if the terms of s DB 41 are satisfied without reference to the requirements of the general permission.  A company, with certain exceptions, is allowed a deduction for interest as a supplement to the general permission, effectively conferring an “automatic” deduction for an interest expense. See ¶10-650. Second, each of the general limitations overrides a supplement to the general permission, unless the provision creating the supplement expressly states to the contrary: s DA 3(3). Example 2: A deduction is allowed as a supplement to the general permission for expenditure incurred in connection with scientific research carried on for the purpose of deriving assessable income: s DB 33. The section also states that it overrides the capital limitation. The consequence is that scientific research expenses of a capital nature are potentially allowed as a deduction. However, the other general limitations continue to apply, so their potential application must be considered before a conclusion on deduction of the expenses can be reached.  A provision in Pt D may override the general permission and/or any one of the general limitations: s DA 3(4). The outcome would be that the provision in question becomes the authority for determining whether the deduction is allowed.  Example 3: A life insurer is denied a deduction for a shareholder base allowable deduction against policyholder base income: s DR 2. The section states that it “overrides the general permission”. As a consequence, no deduction is allowed for these kinds of outgoings incurred by a life insurer.  A further proposition is that, on each occasion, the section in question must expressly state its supplementary nature or its overriding effect: s DA 3(5). This ensures that, for example, any override of the capital limitation must be specifically provided for. The override cannot arise by the less certain means of reasonable inference. No provision in Pt E has a supplementary or overriding effect. Law: IT07 s DA 3  ¶10-021 General permission for deductions The general permission, which is contained in s DA 1, is to the effect that a person is allowed a deduction for an expenditure or loss, including a depreciation loss, to the extent to which it is: ▪ incurred in deriving assessable income, excluded income or a combination of the two, or ▪ incurred in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable income, excluded income or a combination of the two. The notion of assessable income is defined in s BD 1(5) to mean income that is not exempt income, excluded income or nonresidents’ foreign-sourced income. Excluded income is defined in s BD 1(3) to encompass excluded income under subparts CX and CZ and income that is not non-residents’ foreign-sourced income. Despite their different forms, assessable income and excluded income can be expected to be subject to income tax, justifying the deduction of expenses that promote their receipt.  An expenditure can be expected to involve an outlay of funds. On that footing, a company could not expect to be allowed a deduction for the premium foregone when shares are issued at a discount to employees. See Lowry (I of T) v Consolidated African Selection Trust Ltd (1940) 23 TC 259. A loss may be of a similar nature, although the circumstances may suggest that classification as a loss is more appropriate. For example, a loss may encompass amounts paid by a solicitor to clients to compensate them for the misuse of their funds by the solicitor’s bookkeeper: C of T v Webber [1956] NZLR 552. Principles of deductibility C of IR v Banks (1978) 3 NZTC 61,236 (CA) is the leading case on the requirements for deductibility under the general permission. It concerned a part-time tutor who used the dining room in his residence for lecture preparation and marking papers. He claimed a deduction for a proportion of total residence expenses, calculated on a floor-space basis, for interest, rates, insurance premiums, power and depreciation. The Commissioner rejected the claim, relying on Australian cases that hold that expenses incurred in similar circumstances entirely retain their private or domestic character. The test of deductibility under the provisions of the general permission was stated by the Court of Appeal to be: it then becomes a matter of degree, and so a question of fact, to determine whether there is a sufficient relationship between the expenditure and what it provided, or sought to provide, on the one hand, and the income earning process, on the other, to fall within the words of the section. This test was answered in the taxpayer’s favour, to the extent of the expenses claimed, because part of the residence was used for income-related activities and so, for part of the time, had the character of business premises. Many principles have been developed by the courts when identifying in any one case whether there is a sufficient relationship between an expenditure or loss and the income-earning process to allow  deduction of the outlay. Some of the more significant principles follow. ▪ Expense is referable to current business operations. Example 1: A payment made as a matter of commercial necessity or expediency to secure the removal of an unsatisfactory director or employee is referable only to the current business operations of the taxpayer in gaining its assessable income, and that also stamps it with the character of a revenue and not a capital disbursement. See Buckley & Young Ltd v C of IR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271 (CA).  ▪ Expenses on an asset that is part of the income-earning structure. Example 2: A deduction was allowed for rates and taxes incurred in relation to a property once used for farming purposes but subsequently rented out to defray expenses. The property continued to be part of the taxpayer’s ordinary incomeearning structure and not some other category of asset. See New Zealand Cooperative Dairy Co Ltd v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,128 (CA).  ▪ Has the character of a working expense. Example 3: In the course of takeover activities, legal expenses were incurred in defending the allotment of shares in the target company in favour of the taxpayer. The expenses were of a capital nature and so not allowed as a deduction. The Court explained that one principle that applies under provisions like those of the general permission is that: “to make a payment to acquire or to defend the acquisition of a favourable position from which to earn income or to enter into arrangements that will yield income is not in general an outlay incurred either in gaining or in carrying on business for the purpose of gaining assessable income; such a payment in the case of a trading company, occurs at a stage too remote from the receipt of income to be so regarded. To be deductible an outlay must be part of the cost of trading operations to produce income, ie, it must have the character of a working expense”. See John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd v FC of T (1959) 101 CLR 30.  ▪ Costs that become current necessities of the trade. Example 4: BP Australia produced petroleum products for sale to retailers operating through service stations, and developments in the market led to BP Australia and its competitors making trade tie payments to service station operators. The Privy Council summarised the objectives of BP Australia as follows: “The advantage which BP sought was to promote sales and obtain orders for petrol by up-to-date marketing methods, the only methods which could now prevail. Since orders were now and would in future be only obtainable from tied retailers, it must obtain ties with retailers. Its real object, however, was not the tie but the orders which would flow from the tie. To obtain ties it had to satisfy the appetite of the retailers by paying out sums for a period of years, whose amount was dependent on the estimated value of the retailer as a customer and the length of the period. The payment of such sums became part of the regular conduct of the business. It became one of the current necessities of the trade”. The trade tie payments were allowed as a deduction because they were part of BP Australia’s marketing arrangements: the agreements with retailers had merged in and become part of the ordinary process of selling products. The payments were not expended on the structure within which profits were to be earned but were part of the money-earning process. See BP Australia Ltd v C of T of the Commonwealth of Australia [1966] AC 224.  ▪ Unavoidable costs as part of income-producing activities. Example 5: A newspaper publisher alleged to have published libels was allowed a deduction for payments made to settle claims and its associated legal costs: “when it appears that the inclusion in the newspaper of matter alleged by claimants to be defamatory is a regular and almost unavoidable incident of publishing it, so that the claims directly flow from acts done for no other purpose than earning revenue, acts forming the essence of the business, no valid reason remains for denying that the money was wholly and exclusively expended for the production of assessable income”. See Herald and Weekly Times Ltd v FC of T (1932) 2 ATD 169.  ▪ Expenses expected to produce income. Example 6:  A mining company that had its overseas mining assets seized by enemy action maintained an administrative structure and continued to derive some investment income. Any income from mining activities was exempt income, with assessable income including the investment income. It was a question of fact what portion of total expenses were incurred in gaining or producing assessable income. To come within that concept, “it is both sufficient and necessary that the occasion of the loss or outgoing should be found in whatever is productive of the assessable income or, if none be produced, would be expected to produce assessable income”. See Ronpibon Tin NL v FC of T (1949) 8 ATD 431.  ▪ Protection of the business. Example 7: The taxpayer held patents for the manufacture of machinery for use in the dairy industry, and it was allowed a deduction for the cost of opposing patent applications for similar machinery lodged by competitors under the principle that, in general, “when the expenditure under review has been incurred in safeguarding or protecting an existing business or investment, it is expenditure of a revenue nature”. See C of IR v Murray Equipment Ltd [1966] NZLR 360.  ▪ Accounts are not determinative and the Commissioner or a court cannot say how much a taxpayer ought to spend in earning income. Example 8: Europa Oil purchased petroleum stocks from offshore and distributed them in New Zealand. Its overseas supplier was willing to grant a discount on the purchases, but did not wish to do so expressly. The taxpayer took up a shareholding in a company that “notionally” refined Europa Oil’s purchases, and Europa Oil’s share of the refining profits matched the discount that the overseas supplier was willing to allow. The Privy Council agreed with the Commissioner that Europa Oil’s deduction for its purchases of petroleum product should be reduced by the amount of the refining profit. This was so as to reflect the true cost of the purchases. In coming to this conclusion, the Privy Council stated the following principles: “… the Crown is not bound by the taxpayer’s statement of account, or by the heading under which expenditure is placed. It is entitled to ascertain for what the expenditure was in reality incurred. … it is not for the Crown to say that he might have acquired his stock at a lesser price and to deny him any deduction above what it considers he should have paid. This was the basis, as their Lordships understand it of the  decision of the High Court of Australia in Cecil Bros Pty Ltd v F C of T (1964) 111 CLR 430. The proposition that ‘it is not for the Court or the Commissioner to say how much a taxpayer ought to spend in obtaining his income, but only how much he has spent’ was one which the High Court considered to be soundly based on authority and with which their Lordships fully agree. [the general permission] does not enable the Crown to disallow expenditure genuinely made whenever it can be found that some economic advantage accrues to the trader as a result of making the expenditure. … Taxation by end result, or by economic equivalence, is not what the section achieves”. See C of IR v Europa Oil (NZ) Ltd 70 ATC 6012; [1971] NZLR 641 (PC) and also Europa Oil (NZ) Ltd v C of IR (No 2); C of IR v Europa Oil (NZ) Ltd (No 2) (1976) 2 NZTC 61,066; [1976] 1 NZLR 546 (PC), where the opposite conclusion was reached in relation to revised contractual arrangements under which the refining profit was received by a subsidiary company and not Europa Oil itself.  ▪ Income-earning activities must exist. Example 9: No deduction is allowed for the loss suffered when there is a misappropriation of funds that had been given for investment in income-earning schemes to a person who turned out to be a fraudster. The income-earning activity never started because of the misappropriation. See Calkin v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,781 (CA).  ▪ No double deduction. Example 10: The cost of purchases of stock for a new business does not attract two deductions, one under the general permission and the other under the trading stock provisions. See BASF New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,322 (CA) (and note also that s BD 4(5) provides that any allocation of an expenditure or loss to more than one income year cannot exceed the amount of the expenditure or loss).  ▪ An intention to derive a profit. Example 11:  A parent company agreed to pay the financing and overhead expenses of a subsidiary company in return for a share of the profits from the sale of one of the subsidiary’s property developments in circumstances where the property was likely to be sold at a significant loss. No deduction was allowed, even though a taxpayer in business “… does not have to show that, realistically, there was a reasonable prospect of profit. The existence of a genuine intention, however illfounded, to carry on business for profit is enough. But a claimed intention may be viewed with some scepticism if, on an objective examination of the realities at the time, it appears that, even in the longer term, a profitable outcome was impossible or highly unlikely. Lack of a reasonable prospect of profit may indicate that, no matter what legal entitlement to a profit may have existed, the taxpayer did not make the expenditure with that intention”. See Mainzeal Holdings Ltd v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,409 (CA).  ▪ Tax-avoidance advice not deductible. Example 12: A company that participated in the “J G Russell template”, by which the company paid its profits to a loss company under a tax-avoidance arrangement for the benefit of the company’s shareholders, was not allowed a deduction for a consultant’s fees to the extent that they related to advice on the tax-avoidance arrangement. See Miller v C of IR; Managed Fashions Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,961 (CA).  Law: IT07 ss BD 1(3), (5), DA 1  ¶10-032 Apportionment of deductions The general permission and the general limitations incorporate the concept of apportionment. An expenditure or loss is allowed as a deduction “to the extent” that it is incurred in deriving assessable income. An expenditure or loss is not allowed as a deduction “to the extent” that a general limitation applies. As a general proposition, there are no statutory provisions which specify how the concept of apportionment is to be applied. The exceptions to this are the specific apportionment rules contained in subpart DG for certain mixed-use assets, namely land and certain boats and aircraft used partly for business and partly for private use  (¶10-035), and the statutory guidance provided in subpart DE on the motor vehicle expenses of the self-employed person (¶10-710). Buckley & Young Ltd v C of IR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271 is the leading case identifying the situation in which an apportionment is to be made. The categories of apportionment identified were as follows: ▪ the apportionment of expenses on an asset used for both business and private purposes may be fairly based on factual use or availability for use, for business purposes and private purposes ▪ a pro rata basis, by reference to the advantages generated by the expenditure ▪ cash value equivalent when the benefit gained is not in the form of cash, and ▪ when the advantage cannot be quantified, other non-monetary factors may point to a reasonable basis of apportionment. In Buckley & Young, the Court of Appeal said that a fair balance must be maintained and that the onus of proof must be applied in a broad and commonsense way. The taxpayer must be able to point to some intelligible basis upon which a positive finding can be made that a defined part of the total sum is deductible. The final question is whether the taxpayer has discharged the onus of demonstrating that the Commissioner’s assessment is wrong and, if so, why it was wrong and the extent to which it was wrong. The taxpayer must demonstrate affirmatively that at least a minimum quantifiable sum is deductible. Unless there is sufficient evidence to justify a conclusion that some particular part or a minimum fractional share of the total expenditure is actually attributable to a deductible item, any answer will have failed to discharge the onus of proof. Example 1: The calculation for apportionment of dual purpose expenditure cannot be based on insufficient evidence. Although it is not necessary for there to be some kind of  scientific process or absolute precision, there must be some basis upon which a calculation can be made other than speculation. See Christchurch Press Co Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,124.  FC of T v Metal Manufactures Ltd 2001 ATC 4152 concerned a sale and leaseback of substantial manufacturing premises. The vendor/lessee was not granted a right to repurchase the premises at the end of the five-year lease term, but the parties anticipated that repurchase would occur. The payments of rental were allowed as a deduction in full with no abatement for the alleged collateral advantage of being able to re-acquire the premises at the end of the lease term. The lessee had no legal right to reacquire the premises. In a companion case involving the sale and leaseback of an ammonia plant, the court said that there needs to be more than a casual relationship between the outgoings for rent and the expected repurchase of the plant before an apportionment of the rental may be made. Events such as obsolescence, destruction or insolvency may emerge before the end of the lease to leave the purchaser/lessor with the plant. See Eastern Nitrogen Ltd v FC of T 2001 ATC 4164. To determine the range of apportionable benefits, the legal rights test must be applied. By the outgoing, does the taxpayer acquire a legally enforceable right to have some act performed that confers a benefit in money or money’s worth upon the taxpayer or some other person? Example 2: A petroleum company’s legal rights extended only to the delivery of petroleum. This meant that refining profits shared by the vendor with a related company of the taxpayer could not be applied by the Commissioner to reduce the deduction claimed for petroleum purchases. See Europa Oil (NZ) Ltd v C of IR (No 2); C of IR v Europa Oil (NZ) Ltd (No 2) (1976) 2 NZTC 61,066 (PC).  Another restriction on the power of apportionment is that the Commissioner may only apportion the non-income-producing benefits that are conferred on the taxpayer. In some cases the nonincome-producing benefit is an unavoidable effect of the outgoing  and not part of the purpose itself. In such a case the inevitable byproduct should not be an apportionable benefit. Example 3: A parent company incurs expenditure benefiting a subsidiary but really intends to benefit only itself. A parent company was allowed a deduction for the salary costs of an employee seconded to manage an ailing subsidiary, because assistance to the subsidiary ensured continued purchase of the parent’s products by the subsidiary: Robinson (I of T) v Scott Bader & Co Ltd [1981] 1 WLR 1135.  Example 4: An apportionment of an interest expense was rejected to allow full deductibility, even though the main purpose of the borrowing was to realise an enhanced capital gain rather than increased trading income. See Pacific Rendezvous Ltd v C of IR (1986) 8 NZTC 5,146.  Example 5: Fees for advice from the promoter of a tax-avoidance scheme which also included general financial advice and assistance was allowed as a deduction only to the extent that the advice was referable to the latter component. A deduction based upon a rate of $250 per hour for the consultant was allowed. See Miller v C of IR; Managed Fashions Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,961.  Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DA 2  ¶10-035 Mixed-use assets Special apportionment rules apply where expenditure is incurred on land, boats or aircraft that are used for both business and private purposes. Use of an asset means the active use of the asset for its intended purpose. The rules apply to land from the 2013–14 income year and to boats and aircraft from the 2014–15 income year. Assets subject to the rules Subpart DG applies to certain assets in the following circumstances:  ▪ the asset is used both for deriving income and for private use ▪ the asset is: □ land, including improvements, or □ a ship, boat or craft used in navigation on or under water, or an aircraft, that has a cost of $50,000 or more or a market value of $50,000 or more on date of acquisition if not acquired at market value, and includes any related item, things or accessories (such as furniture in a holiday home or life jackets on a yacht), and ▪ the asset is not in use for at least 62 days (or 62 working days if typically only used on working days) in the income year. An asset is excluded from the rules in the following circumstances: ▪ the use of the asset meets the following criteria: □ the private use is minor □ the main use of the asset is in a business (excluding a rental or charter business) □ for a company or trust, use of the asset imposes a liability to pay fringe benefit tax or income tax, or ▪ the asset is a residential property and its only income-earning use is as a long-term rental property. One of the most common situations where the mixed-use asset rules apply is that of a holiday home that is rented to the public for shortterm stays. Inland Revenue has published a series of Questions We’ve Been Asked that deal with the different circumstances in which short-stay accommodation is provided. In particular, QB 19/06, “What income tax rules apply if I have a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use myself” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 12), considers  whether the mixed-use asset rules or the standard tax rules apply to claim expenditure for property that is used both privately and for providing short stays to other people. If it is determined that the mixed-use asset rules do apply, then QB 19/07, “How do the mixeduse assets income tax rules apply to a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use privately?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 16), discusses how those rules apply. These items, and the others in the series, are discussed at ¶10-113. The rules apply to relevant mixed-use assets held by sole traders, trusts, partnerships and close companies. Note that the definition of a “close company” was previously modified for these rules so that a reference to a “natural person” in the definition included a reference to a “trustee”. Thus, whereas the Act normally required five or fewer natural persons to hold 50% or more of the voting interests in a company for it to be a close company, under the mixed-use asset rules the majority of the shares in a company could be held by a trustee and the company would still be treated as a close company. However, with effect from 29 March 2018, the normal definition of a “close company” has been amended to include trustees in all cases. Where these rules apply, the entertainment expenditure rules do not apply and there is no fringe benefit tax liability. However, the deemed dividend rules may still apply. The mixed-use asset rules also override the interest deduction provisions — ss DB 5, DB 7 and DB 8. Private use Importantly, where a natural person who owns, leases, licences or otherwise has the asset uses the asset, even for market value consideration, this is caught within the ambit of the rules. This is because the legislation defines “private use” as use of the asset by such a person, regardless of whether an amount of income is derived in relation to its use. However, any amount that is derived is treated as exempt income. The same applies to the use of an asset by a natural person who is associated with a person (including a non-natural person, such as a company or trust) who owns, leases,  licenses or otherwise has the asset. Note that under the mixed-use asset rules, a company and a person are only associated if the person’s share in the company gives them a right to use the asset. “Private use” also includes provision of the asset to other parties for less than 80% of market value, with market value specifically defined using the concepts of open market, ordinary terms and arm’s length. It is not intended to capture situations when an asset is rented by an unrelated person at a reduced price for reasons such as the asset being rented in an off-peak period, for a longer period than usual or to establish profile or market share. Exclusions include: assets used to derive income where the use of the assets is limited to use in the ordinary course of business or deriving the person’s employment income; the required use of an asset to repair damage suffered by it; and the necessary use of an asset to relocate it for the incomeearning purpose. Example 1: Mary owns a launch. During the course of an income year, she takes her family out on the launch, she lets her brother use the launch (paying the market rate of $200 per day) and she lets her friend use the launch (paying fuel costs only at the rate of $50 per day). All these uses are instances of private use. When Mary rents out the launch to non-associates at market rates, takes the launch to another port for rental to nonassociates at $250 per day and then back again to the home port, or takes the launch to a boatyard for repair after damage was caused by a non-associate during a rental period, none of these instances is private use.  To align the treatment of income and expenditure related to private use, any income derived from private use is treated as nonassessable. Apportionment of expenditure Expenditure that relates solely to business use of the asset (such as advertising expenditure) is not subject to apportionment and is fully deductible. In addition, expenditure that relates solely to private use or solely to capital use is non-deductible. Thus, the apportionment rules apply to general expenditure that is not specifically attributable to either business, private or capital use. Note that the rules provide  that expenditure on repairs and maintenance will always be subject to apportionment. The only exception to this is where costs are incurred to repair explicit damage caused when an asset is used to earn income (for example, if renters cause damage to a bach during the rental period, the costs of repairing that damage is deductible in full). In addition, if some or all of the expenditure on an asset is apportioned for tax purposes on the basis of space, floor area or a similar basis, that method of apportionment overrides the rules in subpart DG to the extent of the amount of the deduction. Thus, for example, the mixed-asset rules will not apply to a home office where the expense claim is based on floor area. Where the criteria listed above are satisfied, s DG 9(2) provides a formula that apportions the expenditure between “income-earning days” and the total of income-earning days plus counted days (being the total number of days when the asset is in use, excluding incomeearning days). The proportion of expenditure that is deductible is calculated by multiplying the expenditure by the following formula: income-earning days ÷ (income-earning days + counted days). Example 2: Jim rents out his aeroplane at market value for 100 hours in an income year and uses it for his personal enjoyment for 50 hours. Jim incurs expenditure of $10,000 for general repairs and maintenance of the plane. He may deduct two-thirds of the expenditure. The formula is $10,000 × (100/(100 + 50)) = $6,666.67.  Treatment of interest when asset held in corporate structure Special rules determine the interest expenditure to which the apportionment calculation applies when mixed-use assets are held by close companies. These rules counteract any possible tax advantage to holding mixed-use assets in a corporate structure because of the automatic deduction for interest for companies and the ability of shareholders to deduct interest they incur on debt to buy shares. The amount subject to apportionment depends on  whether the company’s debt value is equal to or less than the asset value, or more than the asset value. For these purposes, the asset value and debt value are defined as follows: asset value means the adjusted tax value of the property, except in the case of land. For land and land improvements, asset value is the following amount, as applicable: ▪ the later of its most recent local body capital value or annual value or its acquisition cost or, if the transaction involves an associated person, its market value ▪ if it is a leasehold estate, the market value of the leasehold estate, based on a registered valuation less than three years old, and ▪ if different activities are carried out on a single piece of land, the value determined under either of the above bullet points adjusted: □ by multiplying the value by the percentage of the land area used for the mixed-use activity, or □ by a registered valuation of the portion of the land used that is less than three years old, and debt value means the average outstanding amount giving rise to the interest payable by the company, based on the amounts outstanding at the start and the end of the income year. If the value of the company’s debt is equal to or less than the value of the mixed-use asset, all of the company’s interest is subject to apportionment. The company is allowed a deduction of the amount calculated under the formula in s DG 11(3B): interest expenditure × (income-earning days + capital-use days) ÷ (income-earning days + counted days). If the debt value is more than the asset value, then the above apportionment formula is only applied to a reduced amount of the  company’s interest expenditure. That reduced amount is calculated by multiplying the interest expenditure by: asset value ÷ debt value. The company is allowed a deduction for the interest expenditure in excess of the reduced amount to the extent to which it would be deductible under the general interest deductibility rules. For a company, this usually means it is fully deductible under s DB 7. If a company has more than one mixed-use asset, the debt value is reduced by amounts already taken into account under subpart DG. This reduction applies when: ▪ there is no net asset balance ▪ the debt value of a group company is greater than another group member’s net asset balance, or ▪ a corporate shareholder’s debt value exceeds its share of the net asset balance of the company in which the shares are held. Example 3: Holiday Home Ltd holds a holiday home with a rateable value of $200,000. The company has debt of $40,000, with associated interest expenditure of $4,000. Since the debt value is less than the asset value, all the interest expenditure must be apportioned using the formula in s DG 11(3B). Boat Ltd has a charter boat that has an adjusted tax value of $60,000. The company has debt of $100,000, with associated interest expenditure of $10,000. Since the debt value is more than the asset value, the company must calculate how much of its interest expenditure is subject to apportionment. The amount subject to apportionment is $6,000 ($10,000 × ($60,000/$100,000)). Therefore, $6,000 of interest expenditure must be apportioned using the formula in s DG 11(3B). The remaining interest expenditure of $4,000 ($10,000 − $6,000) is not subject to apportionment under subpart DG and is allowed as a deduction under s DB 7.  If the asset value of a company exceeds the debt value, that excess (the net asset balance) may be attributed out to other companies in the same group one at a time. Each group company’s interest expenditure is apportioned in the same way as the company holding  the mixed-use asset, except that the group company’s debt value is compared to the net asset balance, rather than the asset value. The net asset balance is reduced each time by each group company’s debt value. If a net asset balance remains after applying the rules to the company holding the mixed-use asset and any group companies, the same rules are then applied to corporate shareholders, although the net asset balance applied is calculated by reference to their voting interests. If a net asset balance still remains, the rules are then applied to non-corporate shareholders. The rules generally do not apply to a shareholder with less than a 50% interest in the relevant company and who did not have any private use of the asset. Example 4: Holiday Home Ltd has an asset balance of $160,000 ($200,000 − $40,000) and is wholly owned by Parent Ltd. Parent has debt of $30,000, with associated interest expenditure of $3,000. Since Parent’s debt value is less than the asset balance, all of Parent’s interest expenditure must be apportioned. The new net asset balance is $130,000. Parent Ltd has two equal corporate shareholders, company Y, which has debt of $20,000 with associated interest expenditure of $2,000, and company Z, which has debt of $70,000 with associated interest expenditure of $7,000. Both companies’ share of the net asset balance is $65,000 ($130,000 × 50%). Since company Y’s debt value is less than its share of the net asset balance, all of its interest expenditure must be apportioned. Company Z’s debt value is greater than its share of the net asset balance, so it must apportion interest expenditure of $6,500 ($7,000 × ($65,000/$70,000)). Company Y has a net asset balance remaining of $45,000 ($65,000 − $20,000). Company Y has two shareholders, Thomas, who has borrowed $200,000 to acquire a 50% interest in the company, and Brent, who has borrowed $10,000 to buy his 50% interest. Each has a 50% share of the remaining net asset balance, so each has $22,500. Since Thomas’s debt value is greater than his share of the net asset balance, Thomas must apportion 11.25% of his total interest expenditure (22,500/200,000). Since Brent’s debt value is less than his share of the net asset balance, all of Brent’s interest expenditure must be apportioned.  Information to be provided Companies holding mixed-use assets must provide the following information to their shareholders for each income year to enable them to make the relevant calculations:  ▪ their share of a net asset balance ▪ their share of an outstanding profit balance, and ▪ any other necessary information. Expenditure quarantining rules Special rules also apply to quarantine expenditure where the amount of income derived from the asset, other than exempt income, is less than 2% of the asset’s capital value or cost in the case of land, or adjusted tax value for other property. In those circumstances, the amount of the person’s expenditure after apportionment is not deductible to the extent it exceeds their income. The quarantined expenditure can be offset against profits in subsequent income years. Example 5: David has a city apartment with a rateable value of $300,000. He rents out the apartment and also uses it privately. He receives market rate rental of $4,000 from non-associates and $6,000 from associates. David’s total allowable expenditure, under ss DG 7, DG 8 and DG 11, is $15,000. Since David’s income from nonassociates is less than 2% of the apartment’s rateable value, the excess expenditure of $11,000 is denied as a deduction. The amount denied may be allocated to a later income year under s DG 17.  Where the mixed-use asset is held in a corporate structure, additional rules are provided to deal with the quarantining of expenditure. Apportioned interest expenditure identified in group companies and shareholders may be subject to quarantining. However, where the company holding the asset has an outstanding profit balance, that profit may be notionally allocated to group companies and shareholders and apportioned interest amounts may be deductible against other income to that extent. Opting out of the provisions Where the income derived from the use of the asset is less than $4,000 (excluding income from associated persons or income that is  less than 80% of market value), the person who has the asset may choose to treat the income as exempt and effectively opt out of the apportionment rules. Any expenditure incurred in relation to the asset will then be non-deductible. The decision to opt out is made each year and can change from year to year. Companies holding mixed-use assets cannot use the opt-out provisions. Transitional rule allowing transfer of assets to shareholders A transitional rule allowed mixed-use assets held by companies to be transferred out to shareholders without triggering any depreciation recovery at the time of transfer (although if the asset was transferred for less than market value, a dividend could arise). If the shareholder later sells the asset for more than its adjusted tax value, the depreciation recovery income will be crystallised at that point (unless the shareholder disposed of the asset before 22 November 2013). A company could choose to apply the rule when it had a mixed-use asset on 31 March 2013 and it transferred the asset to one or more of its shareholders (or the shareholders of its shareholders) before the end of the company’s 2013–14 income year. See further at ¶13-300. Law: IT07 subpart DG  ¶10-040 Timing of deductions The general permission requires an expenditure or loss, including a depreciation loss, to be incurred. The time of incurrence must be determined, having regard to case law, which requires some people to recognise expenditure or loss on an accrual basis and others on a cash basis and, more generally, defines the concept of incurrence. Example 1: A forestry company with an interest liability contingent on the sale of a forest was held not to have incurred interest expenditure before that date. See AM Bisley & Co Ltd v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,082.  There must also be an ascertained liability, although an outgoing that is defeasible is still incurred while an outgoing that is contingent is not. Example 2: A company resolved to pay directors’ fees, being the greater of the fees of the prior year or the profits for the present year. The directors, though, could elect to accept a lesser sum. It was held that the directors’ fees were deductible in the income year the resolution was passed. The issue to be decided by the Court was whether the company had incurred the expenditure in the income year in which the resolution was passed so that it would be deductible in that same year. The Court held that the company was definitely committed to payment of the fees. It did not matter that the company’s commitment could be diminished or avoided by the action of others, nor did it matter that quantification was not to occur until later. With a formula for quantification there was, as at the end of the income year, a commitment by the company to the directors. See C of IR v Glen Eden Metal Spinners Ltd (1990) 12 NZTC 7,270 (CA).  It is not easy to regard a depreciation loss as having been incurred. The loss is a measure of the physical deterioration and decline in value of an asset being used to produce income. To address this, an amount of a depreciation loss is treated as being incurred in the income year for which it is calculated. An expenditure or loss satisfying the general permission is not necessarily allowed as a deduction in the income year it is incurred. It is deductible in the year incurred unless a provision in Pts D and I provides for allocation on another basis: s BD 4(2). The allocation of deductions may also be modified by provisions in Pt E. Subject to the possibility of exemption, the deduction of outgoings classified as prepayments are deferred so as to be matched with their term or the income generated. There are further matching rules for prepayments and outgoings for employment income (¶10-052). The requirement to adopt a spreading method for the recognition of income and expenditure under a financial arrangement is another regime that may result in the allocation of a deduction to an income year different from the year of incurrence. Further rules apply to deductions arising from limited recourse loans (¶10-061).  Section BD 4(5) provides that any allocation of an expenditure or loss to more than one income year cannot exceed the amount of the expenditure or loss. Meaning of Incurred The test developed by the case law on when an expenditure or loss is incurred is the point at which the taxpayer is “definitively committed” to the outgoing. King v C of IR (1973) 1 NZTC 61,107 (SC) concerned a borrowing raised from the State Advances Corporation for farming purposes on terms providing for a contribution of $1,354 to a reserve fund. The $1,354 was added to the principal upon draw down of the loan for it to be repaid out of subsequent loan servicing payments. The High Court decided that the $1,354 was expenditure incurred in the year of draw down. From the case law, the High Court identified the principle that expenditure is incurred when the taxpayer is definitively committed to it. It is not necessary that there should have been an actual disbursement of funds. In the present case, the taxpayers were definitively committed to payment of the contribution upon draw down of the loan. C of IR v Mitsubishi Motors New Zealand Ltd (1995) 17 NZTC 12,351 concerned a motor vehicle manufacturer that claimed a deduction for a provision raised at balance date to cover the estimated cost of meeting vehicle warranty claims relating to vehicles sold during the year. The taxpayer’s experience was that some 63% of vehicles sold required some remedial work under the warranties. The taxpayer was able to make a reasonably accurate forecast, based on previous experience, of what would be the total cost of remedial work on all vehicles sold during the year. The Privy Council thought that it was significant that the defects giving rise to the warranty claims in due course were latent defects present at the time the vehicle left the factory. The question then became whether, in light of all the surrounding circumstances, a legal obligation to make a payment in the future could be said to have accrued (disregarding merely theoretical contingencies). In the present case, the taxpayer could be said to be definitively committed to its estimate of the expenditure necessary to remedy the latent  defects. At balance date, those defects were an existing fact and not a future contingency. The taxpayer would be required to perform the remedial work under the vehicle warranty. The Mitsubishi decision was the subject of an extensive discussion by the Commissioner in an interpretation statement published in the Appendix to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 6, June 1998. The item discusses what is required to arrive at a reasonable estimate of future costs, like warranty costs, observing that some method based on past experience needs to be adopted rather than arbitrarily seizing on a figure. The Commissioner also concluded that the provisions on prepayments are unlikely to apply to warranty expenditure incurred in circumstances similar to those which arose in Mitsubishi. Example 3: No liability for land tax was incurred as at 31 March, because no annual taxing Act had been passed imposing the tax by that date. See C of IR v McDonald and Watson (1990) 12 NZTC 7,314 (CA).  Example 4: Employee bonuses for an income year had not been incurred by balance date, because the total quantum of the year’s bonuses, and whether the employer would actually exercise its discretion to pay one in any particular case, had not been determined by balance date. For the expenditure on the year’s bonuses to have been incurred by balance date, there must be a legal liability to pay them and not just a commercial certainty that they would be paid. See Merrill Lynch International (Australia) Ltd v FC of T 2001 ATC 4541.  Example 5: Concession fees payable for the right to operate a toll road system were incurred when notes for their payment were issued every six months, even though the amount to be paid under the note was not due for payment for several years. The note issuer was completely subject to and definitively committed to paying the concession fees that accrued over each six-month period. See City Link Melbourne Ltd v FC of T 2004 ATC 4945.  Example 6: Accountancy fees are deductible in the year in which the accounting services are performed, even if the services relate to an earlier accounting year. Arguably though, if the taxpayer had a genuine commercial commitment to pay the fees for year-end accounting services at the end of the tax year, a deduction may be allowable. See Case Y17 (2008) 23 NZTC 13,171.  Law: IT07 ss BD 4, EE 1(4)  ¶10-052 Deductions for prepayments Expenditure allowed as a deduction, some part of which is unexpired at balance date, is subject to the treatment that: ▪ the unexpired portion at balance date is income for the income year, and ▪ the unexpired portion is allowed as a deduction in the following income year. If necessary, this treatment is repeated in subsequent income years, until the point is reached that there is no unexpired portion for the expenditure. There are exclusions and exemptions. The exclusions encompass expenditure subject to the regimes concerning revenue account property, trading stock, livestock, excepted financial arrangements, lease inducement payments, films, petroleum exploration or development, mining exploration or development, specified leases, personal property leases and financial arrangements. The exemptions are incorporated in a determination issued by the Commissioner (¶10-056). The deduction allowed in the following income year for a year’s unexpired portion is allowed under s DB 50. That provision operates as a supplement to the general permission. The general limitations continue to apply, but not to the extent that they were excluded when the deduction was allowed in the first instance.  With effect from 1 April 2017, the unexpired portion of expenditure on pieces that are fitted to an aircraft engine as part of an aircraft engine overhaul is treated as being expenditure incurred in carrying out the aircraft engine overhaul for the purposes of ss DW 5 and DW 6 (see ¶10-127) and the deduction in s DB 50 does not apply. The deduction allowed for expenditure on the payment of employment income may also be deferred if it is not actually paid within specified periods of balance date (¶10-292). The unexpired portion of an expenditure is ascertained by reference to what the outgoing is incurred on. ▪ Goods: There is an unexpired portion of expenditure on goods if, at the end of the income year, the goods have not been used up in deriving income, and they are not destroyed or rendered useless for deriving income. Goods are all forms of real or personal property with the exception of a chose in action, money or a product transmitted by a non-resident to a resident by wire, cable, radio or similar means. Since goods include real property, there is an unexpired portion in relation to expenditure on the purchase of land that is work in progress at balance date under a land subdivision scheme. See Thornton Estates Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,577. ▪ Services: There is an unexpired portion of expenditure on services if the services have not been performed by the end of the income year. Services are anything that are not goods, money or a chose in action. ▪ Chose in action: There is an unexpired portion of expenditure on a chose in action, if there is an amount relating to a period of enforceability falling after the end of the income year. A chose in action is a thing that cannot be possessed but only enforced by legal proceedings, such as a debt, a royalty agreement or an insurance contract. It can include a fishing quota: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 12, December 2003 at 23.  ▪ Reimbursing allowances: In the case of an exempt reimbursing allowance payable to an employee (¶3-425–¶3-449), any unexpired portion of the expenditure is ascertained on the basis that the employee’s services were performed in the income year in which the employee’s expenditure is expected to occur. The consequence is that a reimbursing allowance would have an unexpired portion at the end of an income year only if the employee is expected to meet the reimbursed cost after that income year. Upon the death of a taxpayer, the unexpired portion of a prepayment passes to the administrator of the estate. The same applies if the administrator makes a distribution to a person beneficially entitled to the distribution. The standard treatment of determining a year’s unexpired portion of the expenditure is applied by the administrator or the beneficiary, as appropriate. Law: IT07 ss CH 2, DB 50, EA 3, FC 7  ¶10-056 Prepayments — exemptions Determination E12 states what expenses incurred in an income year are excluded from the prepayments provisions requiring an add back for the unexpired portion of the outgoing. There are three components of the determination: ▪ column 1 describes the expenditure potentially exempted from the prepayments provisions ▪ column 2 provides for a maximum amount of the unexpired portion for some of the expenses, if the exemption is to be available ▪ column 3 provides for a maximum term for some of the expenses, if the exemption is to be available. No exemption is available if the deduction is deferred to a later income year for financial reporting purposes. The exemptions  incorporated in the determination are shown in the table that follows. The table is applied to a partnership as if it was a single person.  Description of expenditure  Maximum total amount of unexpired portions  Time period between balance date and expiry date  Column 1  Column 2  Column 3  a) rental for the lease of land or buildings relating to a period ending more than 1 month after balance date  $26,000  6 months  b) rental for the lease of land or buildings other than rental dealt with elsewhere in this determination  –  1 month  $26,000  6 months  $58,000  unlimited  –  12 months  c) rental for the lease or bailment of livestock or bloodstock d) payment for purchase of consumable aids e) insurance premiums under an insurance contract if the total amount of such expenditure incurred in the income year in respect of the contract does not exceed $12,000  Description of expenditure  Maximum total amount of unexpired portions  Time period between balance date and expiry date  Column 1  Column 2  Column 3  f) payment in respect of equipment service contracts or warranties if the consideration for the contract or warranty forms an inseparable and indeterminate part of the consideration for the asset or assets to which it relates  –  unlimited  g) payment in respect of a contract for the service or maintenance of plant, equipment, or machinery if the total amount of such expenditure incurred in the income year in respect of the contract does not exceed $23,000  –  3 months  h) payment for the use or maintenance of telephone and other communication equipment  –  2 months  i) costs of services, other than those dealt with elsewhere in this determination  $14,000  6 months  Description of expenditure  Maximum total amount of unexpired portions  Time period between balance date and expiry date  Column 1  Column 2  Column 3  j) periodic charges, other than those dealt with elsewhere in this determination  $14,000  12 months  k) purchase of stationery  –  unlimited  l) subscriptions for a newspaper, journal, or other periodical, including for the maintenance or annotation of a documentary information service  –  unlimited  m) motor vehicle registration and drivers’ licence fees  –  unlimited  n) subscriptions, or other fees (but excluding any payment in respect of a franchise agreement) entitling membership of any trade, professional, or other association if the amount of such expenditure incurred in the income year in respect of the association does not exceed $6,000  –  12 months  Description of expenditure  Maximum total amount of unexpired portions  Time period between balance date and expiry date  Column 1  Column 2  Column 3  o) costs on postal and courier services, including such expenditure for franking, private post boxes and private postbags, business reply post and freepost, and expenditure evidenced by the possession of postal stamps  –  unlimited  p) rates made and levied under Part 3 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002 to the extent of the amount invoiced on or before balance date  –  unlimited  q) advance bookings for travel and hotel or motel accommodation  $14,000  6 months  r) cost of advertising  $14,000  6 months  s) road-user charges  –  unlimited  t) audit fees  –  unlimited  u) mandatory accounting costs  –  unlimited  Description of expenditure  Maximum total amount of unexpired portions  Time period between balance date and expiry date  Column 1  Column 2  Column 3  v) expenditure described in section DB 3(1) of the Income Tax Act 2007 and not excluded by section DB 3(2) of that Act  –  unlimited  w) direct claim settlement costs included in the outstanding claims reserve of a general insurer in relation to a contract of insurance, if the total gross claim cost (excluding GST) included in the outstanding claims reserve in relation to any 1 claim does not exceed $65,000 (excluding GST)  –  unlimited  Law: IT07 s EA 3; TAA 91AAC  ¶10-061 Deduction for limited recourse funding The deduction allowed for expenditure funded out of a limited recourse loan may effectively be deferred until the taxpayer is at risk of having to repay the loan. This is achieved by adding back, as assessable income, a year’s loss from the arrangement that is based upon the loan balance that has not been repaid. Affected arrangements  An arrangement is subject to the rules deferring deductibility by the add back of income where the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ a promoter promotes sale of the arrangement ▪ deductions result from the arrangement for a participant or an affected associate that are more than any assessable income resulting from the arrangement ▪ the deductions resulting from the arrangement arise up to two income years after the year the participant made the investment ▪ there is a borrowing under a limited recourse loan ▪ at the relevant balance date (of the year of investment or the following two income years), the participant and affected associates hold arrangement property with a cost that is: □ less than twice the limited recourse borrowings, and □ more than 142.85% of the cost of any included acceptable property (being land, buildings, plant, machinery, shares of 10% or less in a listed company, employee shares or options and foreign company shares assessable only under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules). A limited recourse loan is a financial arrangement (that is not an excepted financial arrangement) that involves the provision of money: ▪ with one or more of the following effects: relieving the borrower from the obligation to repay all or some of the loan, deferring repayment for 10 or more years and, in substance, securing repayment against assets employed in the arrangement, and ▪ if the lender is not an associate of the borrower, the money is provided on non-arm’s length terms and the lender is either a non-resident or a person who does not regularly lend on arm’s length terms, or, if the lender is associated with the borrower, the lender obtained the money under a limited recourse loan.  The tests of association are those under subpart YB (Associated persons and nominees) that apply for the whole Act. When ascertaining assessable income, deductions and the cost of property, there is to be a consolidation of any intra-group balances in accordance with generally accepted accounting practice. The income and deductions of partners and joint venturers are calculated by use of the proportionate method under generally accepted accounting practice for partnerships. Calculation of deductions The add back of income is to be made by a participant borrower where: ▪ the participant has deductions exceeding income from the arrangement, and ▪ at balance date, the arrangement involves a limited recourse loan. A participant is treated as deriving assessable income from the arrangement calculated by the formula: (participant’s excess deductions ÷ total individual excess deductions) × total ineligible amount where: participant’s excess deductions is the amount of excess deductions over income from the arrangement for the income year for the participant total individual excess deductions is the amount, for the income year, by which the total deductions from the arrangement are more than the total assessable income from the arrangement for the group that consists of the participant and each affected associate, and total ineligible amount is the lesser of:  □ the total individual excess deductions for the group which has participated in the arrangement in the income year, and □ the total limited recourse amount that, on balance date or the latest balance date of the participant and the affected associates, the participant or the affected associates have an undischarged obligation to repay as part of or for the purposes of the arrangement, ie the balance of the loan not repaid as at balance date. The Commissioner’s explanation of the rules on limited recourse funding at the time of their introduction can be found in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 1, February 2004 at 58. Law: IT07 ss DB 58(2), GB 45–GB 48  ¶10-071 Summary of general limitations for deductions If applicable, or to the extent applicable, any one of the general limitations operates to prevent deduction of an expenditure or loss, including a depreciation loss, under the general permission. An exception applies if there is a supplement to the general permission that operates to restore deductibility. The interaction between the general permission, the general limitations and supplements is outlined at ¶10-016. General limitations The general limitations comprise the following: ▪ capital limitation: the rule that a deduction is denied for an expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is of a capital nature (see ¶10-075) ▪ private limitation: the rule that a deduction is denied for an expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is of a private or domestic nature (see ¶10-078) ▪ exempt income limitation: the rule that a deduction is denied for an expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is incurred in  deriving exempt income (see ¶10-080) ▪ employment limitation: the rule that a deduction is denied for an expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is incurred in deriving income from employment (see ¶10-082) ▪ withholding tax limitation: the rule that a deduction for an expenditure or loss is denied to the extent to which it is incurred in deriving non-resident passive income subject to final withholding (see ¶10-085), and ▪ non-residents’ foreign-sourced income limitation: the rule that a deduction is denied for an expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is incurred in deriving non-residents’ foreign-sourced income (see ¶10-085). Law: IT07 s DA 2  ¶10-075 Capital limitation for deductions A very large body of case law has developed under the topic of whether an outgoing is of a capital nature. The distinction between capital expenditure and revenue expenditure centres on the difference between the structure of a business (capital) and the regular conduct of the business (revenue). An expense that intends to produce an enduring benefit for the business is also often regarded as being of a capital nature. Distinction between structure and process This distinction between structure and process was clearly explained in Sun Newspapers Ltd v FC of T (1938) 61 CLR 337. The taxpayer was a newspaper publisher. To forestall a potential competitor entering the market, it agreed to pay £86,500 to purchase a shareholding interest in the competitor, to receive a non-competition covenant with a term of three years and to have ability to use some plant. The taxpayer supported deductibility of the payment on the ground that it was incurred for the purpose of earning more profit. The High Court of Australia rejected this view and held that the  payment was capital expenditure and, as such, not allowed as a deduction. Dixon J explained the capital/revenue distinction as follows: The distinction between expenditure and outgoings on revenue account and on capital account corresponds with the distinction between the business entity, structure, or organisation set up or established for the earning of profit and the process by which such an organisation operates to obtain regular returns by means of regular outlay, the difference between the outlay and returns representing profit or loss. The business structure or entity or organisation may assume any of an almost infinite variety of shapes and it may be difficult to comprehend under one description all the forms in which it may be manifested. In a trade or pursuit where little or no plant is required, it may be represented by no more than the intangible elements constituting what is commonly called goodwill, that is, widespread or general reputation, habitual patronage by clients or customers and an organised method of servicing their needs. At the other extreme it may consist in a great aggregate of buildings, machinery and plant all assembled and systematised as the material means by which an organised body of men produce and distribute commodities or perform services. But in spite of the entirely different forms, material and immaterial, in which it may be expressed, such sources of income contain or consist in what has been called a ‘profit-yielding subject’, the phrase of Lord Blackburn in United Collieries Ltd v Inland Revenue Commissioners (1930) SC 215 at p 220. As general conceptions it may not be difficult to distinguish between the profit-yielding subject and the process of operating it. In the same way expenditure and outlay upon establishing, replacing and enlarging the profit-yielding subject may in a general way appear to be a nature entirely different from the continual flow of working expenses which are or ought to be supplied continually out of the returns or revenue. The latter can be considered, estimated and determined only in relation to a period or interval of time, the former as at a point of time. For the one concerns  the instrument for earning profits and the other the continuous process of its use or employment for that purpose. Example 1: Goodwill upon the purchase of a business is the purchase of a capital asset, so that a component of the price ascribed to the value of a customer list is capital expenditure. See C of IR v LD Nathan & Co Ltd [1972] NZLR 209.  Example 2: A payment to a retiring director or employee not to compete with the business has the effect of buying off competition, so that by its very nature, it affects the value of the business’ goodwill, and so is referable to the income-earning structure rather than the income-earning process. See Buckley & Young Ltd v C of IR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271 (CA).  Example 3: Expenditure on the construction of earthworks and other improvements by a waste disposal business seeking to create a landfill site is of a capital nature, but may be allowed as a deduction under a supplement to the general permission. See Waste Management NZ Ltd v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,147 (CA). Similarly, expenditure incurred by a cement manufacturer to obtain consents for the use of quarry sites: the expenditure is part of the cost of creating the permanent structure which produces taxable income and not part of the costs of earning that income. See Milburn NZ Ltd v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,017.  Example 4: To overcome leaks in its underground pipe network, the taxpayer embarked on a programme of inserting polyethylene piping into existing cast iron and steel piping. The expenditure was not simply on repairs and so of a revenue nature, because the programme effectively resulted in a system constructed of a new and different material. See Auckland Gas Co Ltd v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,702 (PC). To replace overhead power lines with underground cables also involves expenditure of a capital nature. See Poverty Bay Electric Power Board v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,001 (CA).  Enduring benefit  The test of an enduring benefit for the business can be traced back to Atherton (I of T) v British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd (1925) 10 TC 155. The taxpayer claimed to deduct the £31,784 paid to trustees to establish a pension fund for the benefit of its clerical and technical salaried staff. The claim was rejected. The House of Lords recognised the principle that a sum of money expended, not of necessity and with a view to direct and immediate benefit to the trade, but voluntarily and on the grounds of commercial expediency and indirectly to facilitate the carrying on of the business, may be of a revenue nature. However, Viscount Cave LC added the following qualification: But when an expenditure is made, not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade, I think that there is very good reason (in the absence of special circumstances leading to an opposite conclusion) for treating such an expenditure as properly attributable not to revenue but to capital. Example 5: A lessee of a motorway service area paid £122,220 to the lessor to change the way in which rental under the lease was calculated. The payment was of a capital nature because it was a once-and-for-all expenditure on a capital asset designed to make it more advantageous. See Tucker (I of T) v Granada Motorway Services Ltd (1979) 53 TC 92.  Example 6: Expenditure incurred for improving land as the site for carrying on business is a capital item if the outgoing is not merely on maintenance or upkeep. A miner incurred expenditure of a capital nature in demolishing a water-cooling tower and an oreprocessing structure on its mining property because the demolitions conferred a positive and enduring advantage on the premises. See Mount Isa Mines Ltd v FC of T 92 ATC 4755.  Example 7: A premium paid upon the execution of a lease of equipment for 10 years brought into existence an asset for the enduring benefit of the business and so was of a capital  nature. See Kemball v C of T [1932] NZLR 1305.  Deductions disallowed under capital limitation The capital limitation has been applied to disallow a deduction for the following outgoings: ▪ legal costs incurred in challenging a ferry service contract awarded to a competitor that would have added a major new revenue stream to the taxpayer’s business if it had been granted the contract: C of IR v Fullers Bay of Islands Ltd (2004) 21 NZTC 18,834. The decision of the High Court was affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Fullers Bay of Islands Ltd v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,716 (CA) ▪ staff costs incurred in installing new units in printing presses: Christchurch Press Co Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,206 ▪ the cost of demolishing an unwanted building that improved the standard and extent of the taxpayer’s wharf area: C of IR v Lyttelton Port Co Ltd (1997) 18 NZTC 13,273 (CA) ▪ the damages payable following the acquisition of an insurance agency in breach of an earlier covenant to another insurer not to acquire a competing agency: Nicholls v C of IR (1965) 14 ATD 52 ▪ the payment by a service station operator to Mobil Oil for the right to use the Mobil system, involving use of the Mobil trademark, information about the layout and operation of a service station and participation in Mobil’s marketing programme: Labrilda Pty Ltd v DFC of T 96 ATC 4303 (and Case S24 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,169 resulted in application of the capital limitation to a franchise fee covering establishment costs and training services) ▪ a payment by a tenant to obtain early termination of the lease: C of IR v McKenzies New Zealand Ltd (1988) 10 NZTC 5,233  (CA). (Note that lease surrender payments made on or after 1 April 2013 are now deductible to the payer and assessable to the payee. See ¶5-242.) ▪ legal costs in defending the allotment of shares acquired in the target company in a successful takeover bid: John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd v FC of T (1959) 101 CLR 30 ▪ abandonment and clean up costs to close down an oil drilling site: RTZ Oil and Gas Ltd v Elliss (HMIT) [1987] BTC 359 ▪ special rent payments by the licensee of a casino that conferred freedom from competition for 10 years within a 60 km radius: Jupiters Ltd v DFC of T 2002 ATC 4566. Capital limitation rejected and deductions allowed Application of the capital limitation has been rejected to allow a deduction for the following outgoings: ▪ outgoings paid by the purchaser of a business following the vendor’s failure to discharge obligations owed up until the date of sale, because the payments ensured continuity of the business operations: Cooke (I of T) v Quick Shoe Repair Service (1949) 30 TC 460 ▪ the £50m of share capital subscribed for in an insolvent subsidiary to enable the subsidiary to be purchased by the Bank of England for £1, because the payment removed the threat to the taxpayer’s business on account of the subsidiary’s insolvency: Lawson (HMIT) v Johnson Matthey plc [1992] BTC 324 ▪ the £1,192 incurred in opposing applications for patents that, if granted, would have resulted in products that competed with those manufactured under the taxpayer’s patents: C of IR v Murray Equipment Ltd [1966] NZLR 360  ▪ legal fees incurred in the course of amending the company’s constitution to improve the ability to borrow: C of IR v Carron Co (1968) 45 TC 18 ▪ interest on funds borrowed to refurbish assets to enhance a capital gain upon their intended sale, and also to increase trading income, which, in the meantime, was deductible in full even though the capital objective was the main purpose of the borrowing: Pacific Rendezvous Ltd v C of IR (1986) 8 NZTC 5,146 (CA) ▪ the fee paid to a financial advisor in the course of the maintenance and monitoring of an investment portfolio: C of IR v North (1999) 19 NZTC 15,219 ▪ contributions to an employee share purchase scheme to enable the scheme trustees to purchase shares for the employees: Heather (I of T) v P-E Consulting Group Ltd (1972) 48 TC 293 ▪ the £300,000 paid to obtain a release from an agency agreement that had become financially onerous, because the release achieved a saving in working expenses: Anglo-Persian Oil Co Ltd v Dale (I of T) (1931) 16 TC 253 ▪ the £30m paid to terminate an agreement for the supply of knowhow to be used in a cellular mobile telephone network, when alternative technology became available at a lower cost: Vodaphone Cellular Ltd v Shaw (HMIT) [1997] BTC 247 (and similarly, a payment by a licensee to achieve early termination of an agreement for the supply of knowhow requiring the payment of royalties: J Gadsden and Co Ltd v C of IR (1964) 14 ATD 18) ▪ the $42m paid to obtain the exclusive right to offer subsidised home loans to defence personnel, because the payment was incurred as part of the process by which the taxpayer operated to obtain regular returns: National Australia Bank Ltd v FC of T 97 ATC 5153  ▪ the cost of moving trading stock to new business premises: Lister Blackstone Pty Ltd v FC of T 76 ATC 4285. See also interpretation statement IS 10/06, “Deductibility of business relocation costs”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 8, September 2010 at 20 ▪ the £1.3m paid to another group company to compensate it for shutting down for 12 months as a price-maintenance measure, because the payment effectively was a levy on the taxpayer’s production for a year and conferred no enduring benefit: C of T v Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd [1964] AC 948 ▪ compensation paid as a percentage of net profits to an aboriginal community for loss of land rights: Cape Flattery Silica Mines Pty Ltd v FC of T 97 ATC 4552 ▪ contributions to campaign to oppose draft legislation to restrict the advertising of tobacco products, which was expected to affect the taxpayer’s market share, but which did not pose a threat to the existence of its business: FC of T v Rothmans of Pall Mall (Australia) Ltd 92 ATC 4508 ▪ the loss by way of a robbery suffered by a drug dealer as he was in the course of purchasing further drugs as his stock in trade: FC of T v La Rosa 2003 ATC 4510 ▪ production costs of a West End musical based on the movie “Jailhouse Rock”. The taxpayers invested in the musical production via a partnership and claimed deductions associated with the staging of the show in their income tax returns. The Commissioner disallowed a deduction for the expenditure on the basis that the partnership was not in the business of producing musicals. Rather, the money expended was in the nature of an investment by the partnership. In deciding in favour of the taxpayer, Miller J acknowledged that not all indicia relating to the capital/revenue distinction point towards the same outcome, and not all are equally important. In this case, the factors supporting the expenditure being of a revenue nature were the close nexus  between the income and the expenditure, its recurring nature, and the taxpayer’s funds being employed as circulating capital: Mallowdale Enterprises Ltd v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-024. Law: IT07 s DA 2  ¶10-078 Private limitation for deductions An outgoing is of a private nature if it is exclusively referable to living as an individual member of society and domestic expenses are those relating to the household or family unit: C of IR v Haenga (1985) 7 NZTC 5,198 (CA). In that case, contributions to a staff welfare fund were found to promote improved performance with the personal benefit of membership of the fund only an incidental effect of the expenditure. The cost of defending disciplinary proceedings brought against a self-employed sharebroker may be allowed as a deduction, because the preservation of personal reputation may be an incidental effect of the expenditure. See McKnight (HMIT) v Sheppard [1999] BTC 236. Expenditure on the purchase of conventional work clothing, such as the suits of a barrister, would generally be regarded as an outgoing of a private nature: Mallalieu v Drummond (HMIT) [1983] BTC 380. Similarly, removal costs paid to relocate partners to another city for the benefit of the firm as a whole would also be regarded as an outgoing of a private nature: MacKinlay (HMIT) v Arthur Young McClelland Moores & Co [1989] BTC 587. The purchase of clothing worn in performances by a self-employed musician is not subject to the private limitation: Case F46 (1983) 6 NZTC 59,792. The property expenses of trustees were limited to 25% where the property was rented out to the father of a trust beneficiary for 25% of a market rental. The explanation for the low rental was the private relationship between the tenant and the trustees. See Madigan v FC of T 96 ATC 4640.  A self-employed taxpayer unsuccessfully claimed to deduct 60% of his private nursing care costs on the ground that he chose private care to enable him to continue with his business activities: Murgatroyd (I of T) v Evans-Jackson (1967) 43 TC 581. A selfemployed solicitor also failed in his claim to deduct the cost of cardiac bypass surgery: Case F158 (1984) 6 NZTC 60,354. The cost of food and drink may become subject to restricted deductibility under the regime on entertainment expenditure (see ¶10-402). There are provisions that ensure no deduction is allowed for costs associated with domestic services performed by a spouse or civil union partner in connection with the home (see ¶10-900). Special rules apply to apportion deductible expenditure relating to land used both privately and to earn income, and to boats and aircraft costing more than $50,000. See ¶10-035 for a discussion of these rules. Law: IT07 s DA 2  ¶10-080 Exempt income limitation for deductions The notion of exempt income refers to income that would otherwise be assessable but for the exemption. It does not encompass distributions of a capital nature: C of IR v Brierley (1990) 12 NZTC 7,184 (CA). On that basis, an individual investor was allowed a deduction for the interest paid on borrowings raised to purchase shares that generated very little assessable income. One area in which the exempt income limitation can be expected to have application is in relation to a holding company that derives only exempt dividends from its subsidiaries (see ¶16-800). A common practice is for the holding company to be paid management fees to cover the costs of managing the affairs of the subsidiaries. The subsidiaries can be expected to be allowed a deduction for the management fees as a recurrent cost of their trading operations: Lockwood Buildings Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,483. The exempt income limitation may apply to a premium paid under a sick, accident or disablement policy that will produce benefits that  are exempt income (see ¶10-540). Law: IT07 s DA 2  ¶10-082 Employment limitation for deductions The employment limitation prevents an employee deducting costs incurred in deriving income from employment. An employee is not able to deduct any legal expenses incurred in pursuing a personal grievance claim before an employment tribunal: Cleland v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,086. An employee would not be prevented from deducting the premium paid under a loss of earnings policy that produces benefits that are assessable income, or in relation to interest paid under an employee share loan producing a category of employment income. Neither kind of income is classified as income from employment. An employee is allowed a deduction for a payment made following a breach of a restrictive covenant that had generated assessable income for the employee. See ¶10-880. Law: IT07 s DA 2  ¶10-085 Other general limitations for deductions Withholding tax limitation A non-resident cannot deduct expenses such as financing costs that have been incurred in deriving dividends, interest or royalties subject to non-resident withholding tax as a final tax. See ¶26-460. Non-residents foreign-sourced income limitation A non-resident cannot deduct expenses incurred in deriving foreignsourced income. Since that income is not assessable income, the limitation probably merely confirms that any such costs are not allowed as a deduction in any event. Other limitations  A deduction may not be allowed for a payment to a person outside New Zealand if the taxpayer fails to satisfy an information request by the Commissioner about the payment. See ¶10-730. Law: IT07 s DA 2  SPECIFIC OUTGOINGS ¶10-110 Deductibility of accident compensation levies Levies and premiums paid to the Accident Compensation Corporation by an employer or a self-employed person can be expected to be allowed as a deduction under the general permission. For the employer, the levies and premiums are additional forms of payments of employment income that are normally deductible. For the self-employed person, the levy is a statutory requirement imposed because income-earning activities are being conducted. If deductible, the levy or premium is generally allowed as a deduction in the income year in which it is due and payable. However, if the deduction has been allocated to an earlier income year, and the time bar prevents the Commissioner changing the deduction to the year the levy or premium becomes due and payable, the deduction in the earlier income year stands. Schedule 3, pt A, column G governs timing when deductions are due and payable for a taxpayer with a balance date between 1 October and 6 April (both dates inclusive). See also ¶31-070. Law: IT07 s EF 3  ¶10-112 Deductibility of ACC rehabilitation payments When an ACC claimant receives a personal service rehabilitation payment (including backdated payments) from the ACC and the amount is assessable income, the person is allowed a deduction for the amount paid by him or her to a rehabilitation service provider to the extent of the personal service rehabilitation payment received. This provision supplements the general permission and overrides the  capital limitation and the private limitation. The other general limitations still apply. See further at ¶3-180 and ¶5-303. Law: IT07 s DF 4  ¶10-113 Deductibility of accommodation costs Short-stay accommodation In May 2019, Inland Revenue (IR) released a number of items that deal with the different circumstances in which short-stay accommodation is provided. “Short-stay accommodation” is defined in all of these items to mean accommodation provided for up to four consecutive weeks, in a dwelling that is not the guest’s ordinary residence, and does not include accommodation provided to residential tenants, boarders or care home residents, nor student or emergency accommodation. The items explain a person’s tax obligations if they rent out their home, a room in their home, or a separate residential property or dwelling. These items focus on short-stay accommodation provided through peer-to-peer platforms such as Airbnb or Bookabach. To help taxpayers work out which of the items is relevant to their particular situation, IR also released an Overview, which contains two flowcharts for determining which is the relevant item. For a discussion of QB 19/09, see ¶32-052. Each of the other items is discussed briefly below. Simplified rules for some short-stay accommodation hosts Determination DET 19/02: “Standard-cost household service for short-stay accommodation providers” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 67) provides simplified rules for hosts who provide short-stay accommodation in their own home but who do not rent out rooms for more than 100 nights in the income year. The determination sets standard costs that can be treated as expenditure incurred in deriving income from providing the short-stay  accommodation service. For any income year, a person can choose to use the standard costs instead of their actual expenses (thereby avoiding apportionment calculations), provided the criteria in the determination are met. The standard costs for the 2019–20 income year are $51 a night if the host owns their own home and $46 a night if the host rents their home (after CPI adjustment). The determination is discussed further at ¶5-695. Renting out your own home QB 19/05, “What are my income tax obligations if I rent out my home or a separate dwelling on my property as short-stay accommodation” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 3), explains how the income tax rules apply if a person occasionally rents out their home, a room in their home or a separate dwelling on their property for short stays. If a person rents out their home (or part of their home) as short-stay accommodation, any amounts received from guests will be income. However, if the standard costs approach in Determination DET 19/02 (above) is adopted, the income up to the level of the standard costs will be treated as exempt. Only rental income in excess of the standard costs would have to be declared. If the person is unable, or chooses not, to use the standard costs approach, then all the income will be taxable and deductions will be based on the actual costs related to earning the income. Apportionment of some of these expenses will be necessary, as they will also relate to the private use of the home. If a separate dwelling on the same property as the person’s home is rented out for short-stay accommodation, different tax rules will apply depending on the situation. If the separate dwelling is only rented out and never used privately, all of its rental income will be taxable and all of the deductible expenses in relation to the dwelling may be claimed. If, in addition to sometimes renting out the dwelling, it is also sometimes used privately, the dwelling may be subject to either the “mixed-use asset” rules or the standard income tax rules. To work out which rules apply, see QB 19/06, discussed below.  Expenses that are identified as relating solely to the rental activity include: ▪ advertising costs ▪ any commission or fee paid to an advertising platform or transaction facilitator (this does not include any service fee the guests pay the platform) ▪ supplies used solely by paying guests ▪ any additional insurance premium paid because of the rental activity, and ▪ any additional rates paid because of the rental activity. Expenses that will generally need apportioning because they relate to both the rental activity and the private use of the home include: ▪ power bills ▪ internet expenses ▪ interest on home loan ▪ property insurance ▪ repairs and maintenance, and ▪ rates. In most situations where all or part of a home is rented out, the following will have to be taken into account to work out what proportion of these mixed expenses may be claimed: ▪ the floor area of different parts of the house, and ▪ the number of nights during the year that the room was rented out.  Generally, mixed expenses should be apportioned based on the floor area that the guest has exclusive use of, as a proportion of the total floor area of the house. A reasonable amount based on the guest’s access to common areas may also be added. Inland Revenue will accept 50% as a reasonable amount in most situations. Example: Apportioning mixed expenses based on the number of rental nights Hayley has a two-bedroom villa. She uses the second bedroom occasionally as an office, or when friends or family stay. She decides to rent out the second bedroom through a peer-to-peer platform to make some extra money. When she rents out the room, the guests are also able to use some common areas in the villa – the lounge, dining room, kitchen, laundry, and main bathroom. Hayley rented out the room for 120 nights during the year. The floor areas of the different parts of Hayley’s villa are shown in the diagram below.  Hayley should apportion her mixed expenses on the following basis: Used exclusively by guests – 100% deductible for days the room is rented out Common areas – 50% deductible for days someone is renting the bedroom  Private area – 0% deductible  Hayley has to calculate what proportion of her mixed expenses she may deduct for the areas of the house used exclusively by guests, and what proportion she may deduct for the common areas. The results of those calculations are then added together. The areas used exclusively by guests are 20m2 out of the total 100m2 floor area of the villa, and are 100% deductible for the 120 out of 365 days in the year that the  room is rented out:  The common areas, able to be used by both Hayley and guests, are 55m2 out of the total 100m2 floor area of the villa, and are 50% deductible for the 120 out of 365 days in the year that the room is rented out:  Adding these figures (6.58% and 9.04%) together, Hayley calculates that she may deduct 15.62% of her mixed expenses for the year. Her mixed expenses include her power bills, internet expenses, the interest on her home loan, her property insurance, and her rates. In addition, Hayley may deduct 100% of her expenses that relate solely to the rental activity. These expenses include the cost of advertising the room for rent, her host service fees, the sheets and towels she bought for guests to use (she only uses those for guests renting out the room), and the tea, coffee, sugar, cereal and milk the guests use.  Example taken from QB 19/05 Deductions may also be claimed for the depreciation of the chattels in the home that paying guests can use. If the chattels are only used by guests (eg chattels in a bedroom only used for renting out), the full amount of depreciation will be deductible. For “mixed-use” chattels, however, only part of the depreciation may be claimed. Choosing between mixed-asset rules or standard tax rules QB 19/06, “What income tax rules apply if I have a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use myself?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 12), considers whether the mixed-use asset rules or the standard tax rules apply to claim expenditure for property that is used both privately and for providing short stays to other people. The rules that apply will determine the tax treatment for the dwelling. Different rules can apply each year, so at the end of each income year it must be determined whether the “mixed-use asset” rules or the standard tax rules apply for that year. The main difference between the mixed-use asset rules and the standard rules is how the  proportion of the costs to be deducted can be calculated. QB 19/06 helps determine which rules apply. Good records will need to be kept to work out each year which rules apply, and then to apply the relevant rules correctly. This would include records of: ▪ the number of nights the dwelling is used privately (this includes by the taxpayer, their associates and by anyone for less than 80% of the market value rent) ▪ the number of nights the dwelling is rented out, and how much income is received for renting it out ▪ when the dwelling was available to be rented out (this will be relevant if the standard rules apply), and ▪ any expenses to be claimed as deductions. A dwelling will be a “mixed-use asset” if, during the year: ▪ it was partly used to earn income ▪ it was partly used privately (this includes use by family members, or by friends renting it for “mates’ rates” that are less than 80% of the market value rent), and ▪ it was not used for at least 62 days in the year. The QWBA notes the two situations in which a taxpayer may opt out of the tax rules altogether for the rental income from the dwelling. These are if: ▪ the rental income for the year (not including income from renting to associated natural persons or to friends at “mates’ rates” of less than 80% of market value rent) from the dwelling is under $4,000, or ▪ a loss was made from the dwelling and some of the deductions would be quarantined (that is, where the income from renting  was less than 2% of the property’s value and the deductible expenses exceed the income, the excess deductions are quarantined, meaning they are carried forward to a later income year). If a taxpayer chooses to opt out of the tax rules for the rental income from the dwelling, the income is exempt. This means that no tax is paid on it and no deductions can be claimed for expenses related to the dwelling. Applying the mixed-use asset rules If, after applying QB 19/06 above, a person concludes the mixedasset rules apply, then QB 19/07 will apply. QB 19/07, “How do the mixed-use asset income tax rules apply to a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use privately?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 16), discusses the application of the mixed-use asset rules to property that is used both privately and for providing short-stay accommodation. If the mixed-use asset rules apply, rental income from the dwelling will generally be taxable. However, some income will be exempt — for example, income from renting the dwelling to family members or to others at “mates’ rates”. The mixed-use asset rules set out how to determine the costs that may be deducted against the income from providing the short-stay accommodation. See ¶10-035. Costs that are solely related to renting out the dwelling are fully deductible. Costs that are solely related to the private use of the dwelling are not deductible. Other costs are partly deductible — the deductible amount is based on the number of rental nights relative to the total number of nights the dwelling is used. Only days the dwelling is actually used are counted, so days it is available to be rented out but isn’t actually rented out don’t alter the proportion of expenses that may be deducted. If a loss is made from renting out the dwelling, not all of the expenses may be deductible that year — some might be carried forward to future years.  QB 19/07 modifies the formula in s DG 9 of the Income Tax Act 2007 to refer to “nights” as the appropriate measure for accommodation. Therefore, the formula would be: your expenditure × (income-earning nights ÷ (income-earning nights + counted nights)) The following table from QB 19/07 provides examples of what constitute “income-earning nights” and “counted nights”: Examples of “income-earning nights’ and “counted nights” Income-earning nights  Counted nights  • You rent the property to a nonassociated person at market rates.  • You stay at the property for a holiday.  • Guests damage the property:  • You rent the property to your inlaws at market rates.  - You stay there for two nights and spend the whole weekend repairing the damage  • You rent the property to your best friend for “mates’ rates” of $50 a night rather than the usual price of $100.  ▸ these are both income-earning nights  • Your in-laws or friend who stayed at “mates’ rates” damage the property and you stay there for two nights to spend the weekend repairing the damage.  - After a tiring weekend of repairs, you decide to stay for an extra 2 nights ▸ Only the nights you had to stay for the repairs are income-earning nights – the extra nights are “counted nights” • A guest cancels on the first day of their 3-night booking and no-one else books the place for those nights.  • The paint in the bedrooms is looking shabby, so you stay at the property for a week re-painting. • A non-associated guest paying market rates damaged the property, but the damage is only minor and you fix it in a couple of hours on your next family holiday at the property.  If the “expenditure quarantine rules” apply, expenses may only be deducted up to the amount of the rental income from the dwelling. Any deductions in excess of that are carried forward to future income  years until they’re able to be offset against any future profits from the dwelling (whether the mixed-use asset rules or the standard tax rules apply in the year that a profit is made from the dwelling). The expenditure quarantine rules apply if: ▪ the income from renting out the dwelling during the income year was less than 2% of the property’s value, and ▪ the deductible expenses for the year exceed the income, ie a loss was made. Applying the standard rules QB 19/08, “How do the standard income tax rules apply to a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use privately?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 22), explains how the standard income tax rules apply to a dwelling sometimes rented out as short-stay accommodation. If the standard tax rules apply, rental income from the dwelling will generally be taxable, including “mates’ rates” rental income. The only exception is minor contributions to expenses from family and friends. Costs that relate solely to renting out the property are fully deductible (eg advertising). Costs that relate solely to the private use of the dwelling are not deductible. Other costs are partly deductible — the deductible amount is based on the number of nights the dwelling is rented or available to be rented relative to the total number of nights in the year. If a loss is made from renting out the dwelling, not all of the expenses may be deductible that year — some of the deductions might be carried forward to future years. Renting out property held in trust In December 2019, Inland Revenue released two further items in the series on short-stay accommodation: ▪ QB 19/15, “If property held in a trust is rented out by a beneficiary of the trust for short-stay accommodation, who should declare the income, and what deductions can be  claimed?” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 59) ▪ QB 19/16, “If property held in a trust is rented out by the trustees for short-stay accommodation, who should declare the income, and what deductions can be claimed?” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 65). QB 19/15, relating to property held in trust and rented out by a beneficiary (eg the property is the beneficiary’s home), confirms the rental will be income and the income will belong to the beneficiary. If the standard-costs approach in Determination DET 19/02 is adopted, the income will be exempt to the extent of the standard costs (see above and ¶5-695). If DET 19/02 is not used, the following will still be exempt income if the mixed-use asset rules apply: ▪ amounts received for renting the property to associated natural persons (eg close relatives of the beneficiary such as their children, grandchildren, siblings or in-laws), and ▪ amounts received from renting the property at “mates’ rates” (less than 80% of the market value rent). QB 19/06 should be applied to determine if the mixed-use asset rules or the standard tax rules apply. If the mixed-use asset rules apply, then QB 19/07 discusses in more detail what will be income or exempt income under those rules. See also ¶5-232. With regard to the deduction of expenditure incurred by the trustees and paid by the beneficiary or incurred by the beneficiary, if DET 19/02 is used, the beneficiary cannot deduct any of their actual expenditure unless it is not covered by the standard costs and their income from providing the accommodation exceeds their standard costs. If DET 19/02 is not used, non-capital property-related expenditure is deductible to the beneficiary, subject to apportionment for private use. Generally, apportionment will be as set out in QB 19/05. However, in some situations, the application of QB 19/06 will be required to determine whether the mixed-use asset rules or the standard tax rules apply. If the mixed-use asset rules apply, the  formula for apportioning expenses and periods of private use will restrict the availability of deductions, as discussed in QB 19/07. QB 19/16, relating to property held in trust and rented out by the trustees, also confirms that the rental will be income, but it will belong to the trustees and generally have to be declared in the trust’s tax return. However, if some or all of the income is allocated as beneficiary income, it will be taxed at the beneficiary’s tax rate, rather than the trust rate. If the mixed-use asset rules apply, the following amounts will be exempt income: ▪ amounts received for renting the property to associated natural persons, and ▪ amounts received from renting the property at “mates’ rates”. QB 19/06 should be applied to determine if the mixed-use asset rules or standard tax rules apply. Expenditure incurred and paid by the trustees is deductible to the trustees, subject to apportionment if the property is also used for non-income-earning purposes, eg used by beneficiaries of the trust. QB 19/07 explains how to calculate the percentage of mixed expenses that is deductible if the mixed-use asset rules apply. If the standard tax rules apply, QB 19/08 explains how to calculate the deductible percentage of mixed expenses. Expenditure incurred by the trustees and paid by a beneficiary is deductible to the trustee (not the beneficiary) but will be subject to apportionment if the property is also used for non-income-earning purposes. However, if the beneficiary is not reimbursed by the trustees, the amount of the expense paid by the beneficiary is income to the trustee as either: ▪ rental income under s CC 1, if paid by the beneficiary for use of and/or ability to use the property, provided the property is not subject to the mixed-use asset rules, or  ▪ income under s CG 4, to the extent of the deduction the trustees have been allowed, if not paid by the beneficiary for use of and/or ability to use the property, or if the property is subject to the mixed-use asset rules. The net effect of this is that if the beneficiary is not reimbursed, the trustees do not get the benefit of the deduction. Expenditure incurred by a beneficiary is deductible to the trustees if they reimburse the beneficiary. Again, this may require apportionment. If the trustees do not reimburse the beneficiary, the expenditure cannot be deducted by anyone. In this case, the amount may be rental income, and there may be a settlement on the trust by the beneficiary or a distribution to the beneficiary from the trust. The final item in the series on short-stay accommodation, released in June 2020, is interpretation statement IS 20/04, “Goods and services tax: GST treatment of short-stay accommodation” (see ¶32-052). Private limitation The Commissioner has set out a policy for a self-employed person who resides in his or her business premises comprising a hotel, a motel, a boarding house, a tavern or a private hospital to calculate the component of property expenses prevented from deduction by the private limitation in accordance with the following formula: a b  × c × 50%  where: a is the area of the owner’s quarters b is total area of the premises, and c is all expenditure on financing costs, utilities, rates, insurance and other costs. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 11, April 1994 at 9.  ¶10-117 Deductibility of advertising and sponsorship expenses Expenditure on advertising and sponsorship can be expected to be allowed as a deduction under the general permission. That outcome applies to marketing costs which may be regarded as part of the ordinary process of selling the goods and services of the business: BP Australia Ltd v C of T of the Commonwealth of Australia [1966] AC 224. On that basis: ▪ a motor vehicle dealer was allowed a deduction for the costs incurred in engaging in go-karting activities: Case L7 (1989) 11 NZTC 1,052 ▪ the sponsorship of horse races may be allowed as a deduction: Case M131 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,850 ▪ a courier company was allowed a deduction for the cost of participating in national motor racing events: Case P16 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,107 ▪ a joint venturer in a mining project was allowed a deduction for the cost of holding a golf day at which executives of potential customers played: Cliffs International, Inc v FC of T 85 ATC 4374. The form of the advertising expenditure in some cases may suggest the application of the capital limitation. The cost of the construction of a permanent sign or a neon sign may be of a capital nature. The cost may give rise to a deduction by way of a depreciation loss. The form of the advertising expenditure may also raise the possible application of the private limitation. The issue was raised, but rejected on the facts, in Case L7, where the Taxation Review Authority found that a shareholder’s personal enjoyment from participating in go-kart races was incidental to the company’s predominant objective of expansion of its business.  Expenditure on advertising may constitute entertainment expenditure subject to deductibility of only 50% (¶10-402). Interpretation statement — deductibility of sponsorship expenditure The Commissioner has published an interpretation statement, “Deductibility of Sponsorship Expenditure”. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 14, No 9, September 2002 at 33. The statement indicates that: ▪ a deduction may be allowed for sponsoring a sporting team where the business name is displayed on players’ jerseys ▪ a deduction is allowed for the cost of reimbursing a sporting team for its purchase of, for example, a van that displays the sponsor’s name ▪ a deduction may be allowed for the cost of sponsoring a sporting competition named after the sponsor ▪ a deduction may be allowed for an accounting firm that sponsors performances of an opera to gain exposure to likely attendees of the performances ▪ an up-front sponsorship payment covering a three-year advertising period may be subject to the rules on prepayments spreading the deduction allowed ▪ the rules on prepayments may not apply to a contribution to the construction of a swimming pool complex in return for naming rights for 10 years ▪ a deduction may not be allowed for a gift to a school attended by the donor’s child, where the school is in another district away from where business activities are conducted ▪ a deduction may not be allowed for the sponsorship of a sporting activity that is a hobby of the business proprietor, but which is a completely different activity from the business.  ¶10-127 Deductibility of aircraft overhaul and maintenance costs With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, provisions have been introduced relating to the timing of aircraft engine overhaul deductions. The provisions apply to aircraft operators who use engine-powered aircraft and who are required, under Civil Aviation Rules published by the Civil Aviation Authority, to carry out scheduled overhauls on an aircraft from time to time. The main aspects of the provisions are: ▪ the engine overhaul component is no longer treated as part of the aircraft as a whole for depreciation purposes ▪ the cost of the aircraft engine overhaul component and subsequent overhaul of that component is an allowable deduction, allocated to an income year on a time-in-service basis (ie a spreading method) ▪ a deduction is allowed in transition equal to the undepreciated amount of the cost of an existing aircraft that relates to the engine overhaul component ▪ accrued provisions for future overhaul expenses, as at the beginning of the 2017–18 income year, will be offset against those future overhaul expenses, when incurred ▪ the general deductibility and timing rules continue to apply to all maintenance and overhauls other than expenditure incurred for the engine overhaul component, and ▪ when an aircraft (or engine) is disposed of, engine overhaul deductions are recovered in a manner consistent with the application of the depreciation recovery rules. As a consequence, the administrative practice of accepting the accounting practice of valuing overhaul deductions under a provisioning methodology has ceased.  The provisions change the income tax treatment of the acquisition cost of aircraft by: ▪ estimating the value for an aircraft’s engine overhaul component at acquisition and excluding that value from the aircraft’s base value under the depreciation rules ▪ treating the acquisition value of the engine overhaul component as an allowable deduction, subject to a timing rule ▪ providing that the capital limitation is overridden in determining this deduction, and ▪ clarifying that the cost of overhauling an engine overhaul component is an allowable deduction, and that the capital limitation is overridden, unless the overhaul includes a significant upgrade in engine performance. The provisions include a timing rule to allocate, on a time-in-service basis, allowable deductions for both the engine overhaul component at acquisition and for subsequent overhauls. Relevant use measures for the time-in-service basis are to be determined from current regulated practice. Aircraft operators having just one aircraft may elect to opt out of these spreading rules and instead apply the general deductibility and timing rules for timing overhaul deductions. This election is not available for an operator that, together with associated persons, owns more than one aircraft. On disposal of an aircraft, ss CG 9 and EJ 27 apply in a manner consistent with the depreciation recovery rules that apply to the aircraft, not including the engine overhaul component. For further discussion, including examples of how the rules operate, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 117–132. Law: IT07 ss CG 9, CZ 34, DW 5, DW 6, DZ 22, DZ 23, EA 2(1)(fc), EA 3(4B), EE 7(fb), EJ 24–EJ 27, FA 9(5), FA 10(7B), FA 11(8), YA 1  ¶10-129 Deductibility of annuities As a supplement to the general permission and overriding the private limitation, a deduction may be allowed in certain circumstances for the payment of an annuity charged over income-producing property. Law: IT07 s DX 1  ¶10-152 Deductibility of bad debts A person is denied a deduction for a bad debt, except to the extent to which the debt is written off as bad during the income year: s DB 31(1)(a)(i). This provision authorises the deduction of bad debts that reflect income that was not financial arrangements income. A bad debt deduction is also available where the debt may not be written off during the income year but it is remitted by law (on liquidation or bankruptcy) (s DB 31(1)(a)(ii)), or the debtor company has been released from making all remaining payments under an agreement of composition (s DB 31(1)(a)(iii)). These provisions apply where the person is required to calculate a base price adjustment for the debt. A debt is bad when a reasonably prudent commercial person would conclude that there is no reasonable likelihood that the debt will be paid: Budget Rent A Car Ltd v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,263. In Graham v C of IR, Edwards Graham Ltd v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,107, the High Court accepted that a debt was bad when the taxpayer reached the stage of recognising that the debt was unlikely to be recovered. The deduction is for a bad debt comprising an amount of income. The deduction is not for a bad debt of a capital nature: Mitsui & Co (NZ) Ltd v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,112 (unlimited credit granted by a parent company for goods sold to a subsidiary). Variation for COVID-19 On 11 June 2020, the Commissioner released a COVID variation, COV 20/04, “Variation in relation to s DB 31 Income Tax Act 2007 to  extend time for writing off bad debts” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 6). This variation applied to a person who wished to claim a deduction in the 2020 income year for a bad debt. The variation recognised that the impact of COVID-19 meant that some taxpayers may not have been able to write off debts as bad during their 2020 income year, and it extended the time for writing off debts as bad to 30 June 2020. The variation was subject to the two conditions that the person did not write off the debt by the end of the 2020 income year as a result of the impacts of COVID-19, and that the person took into account only information that was relevant as at the end of their 2020 income year. Public ruling on bad debts The topic of bad debts is addressed by the Commissioner in BR Pub 18/07, “Income tax and goods and services tax — writing off debts as bad” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 9, October 2018 at 3, and which replaced BR Pub 05/01). The commentary on the ruling states that the following factors assist in determining if a debt is bad: ▪ the period the debt has been unpaid ▪ steps taken to collect the debt ▪ knowledge of the debtor’s financial position ▪ whether the debtor is deceased, cannot be traced or is in receivership or liquidation, and ▪ when the debt will become statute barred. The commentary acknowledges that it is not necessary for the debtor to be insolvent before a reasonably prudent commercial person would conclude that a debt is bad. Similarly, it is not necessary for the creditor to commence legal proceedings to recover the amount owing (provided sufficient information is held to support the conclusion that the debt is bad). Example 1:  A supplier has supplied goods on credit to Mr B. Mr B owes the supplier $2,000 for the goods. The supplier knows that Mr B has left town, and that mail addressed to him is returned marked “Gone No Forwarding Address”. In this case it is reasonable to assume that the debt will not be recovered. The money owed by Mr B is a bad debt.  Example 2: C owes $100,000 to a company. The credit controller for the company has considered the likelihood of default on every loan currently owing to the company. The credit controller has estimated the likelihood of default for C to be 5%, and wants to know if the company can consider $5,000 of that loan (5% of the $100,000 owing) to be a bad debt. Making an estimate of the likelihood of default on debts is not sufficient for a debt (or a percentage of it) to be bad. It is not reasonable to assume that the debt is bad.  Examples taken from BR Pub 18/07. To be allowed as a deduction, the debt must be written off. This requires something more than the decision that a debt is bad. The appropriate bookkeeping entries would be necessary in most cases: Case N69 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,541. In Case S73 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,454, a letter to the Commissioner was accepted as evidence of the write-off of a debt. Case T48 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,325 reached the same conclusion in relation to a business that wrote “written off” on its ledger cards, which recorded the debts owed. The ruling states that the bad debt must be “written off”, in accordance with the accounting and record keeping systems maintained by the taxpayer, in one of the following ways: ▪ in the case of a taxpayer who maintains a computer-based accounting software system, an authorised person has made the appropriate entry in that system recording the debt as written off ▪ in the case of a company taxpayer (other than one set out above), an executive or other responsible officer of the company with the authority to do so, has made the appropriate  bookkeeping entries in the company’s account books recording the debt as written off ▪ in the case of a taxpayer (other than a company) who maintains double-entry accounts, an authorised person has made the appropriate bookkeeping entries in the business’s account books recording the debt as written off, or ▪ in the case of a taxpayer who is an unincorporated sole trader or small unincorporated business taxpayer who does not maintain double-entry accounts, the taxpayer has made a note in their bookkeeping records setting out the amount owed by the bad debtor, stating that the debt has been written off, and recording the date of the writing off. Example 3: The taxpayer’s income tax balance is 31 March. The taxpayer maintains a debtors’ ledger and is not registered for GST. The debtors’ ledger is updated on 31 March 2017. The entries made include the journal entry writing off the bad debt. The bad debt will have been written off in the year ending 31 March 2017.  Example 4: The taxpayer’s income tax balance date is 31 March. The taxpayer does not maintain a debtors’ ledger and is registered for GST. GST returns are filed on a two-monthly invoice basis. There is no indication on her underlying debtor records to show the status of the debt. She has claimed a deduction from output tax for the bad debt in her GST return for the taxable period ending 31 January 2017. That return was prepared in February 2017. The taxpayer is not entitled to the deduction from GST output tax. Claiming the deduction from output tax for GST purposes is not sufficient writing-off of the bad debt for either GST or income tax purposes. She is not allowed a deduction for the bad debt in the income year ending 31 March 2017.  Examples adapted from BR Pub 18/07. Financial arrangements income  A person who derives assessable income from a financial arrangement is allowed a deduction for an amount owing under the financial arrangement to the extent that the income has been written off as a bad debt or the debtor has been released from making all remaining payments: s DB 31(2). This provision allows a deduction for interest recognised as income by the lender under a spreading method, but which is not paid by the borrower. With effect from 1 July 2017, to obtain a deduction under the section, the lender must also not be associated with the borrower or the borrower must have no deductions for the financial arrangement. A deduction is allowed for an amount owing under a financial arrangement to the extent to which it is written off as a bad debt or the debtor is released from making all remaining payments where: ▪ the taxpayer carries on a business that includes dealing in or holding financial arrangements that are the same or similar to the financial arrangement, and ▪ the financial arrangement is not with an associated person. This provision permits a deduction for a loss of principal under a financial arrangement: s DB 31(3). However, the important qualification is that the taxpayer’s business must include dealing or holding financial arrangements of the kind in question. Effectively, that qualification limits the deduction for a loss of principal to financiers. The capital limitation is overridden in relation to a deduction for a bad debt of the principal amount of a financial arrangement held as part of a business that includes dealing in or holding financial arrangements. The deduction available to taxpayers who are in the business of dealing or holding financial arrangements is limited to the true economic loss suffered. For example, where such a taxpayer acquires a debt for less than its face value, a deduction will only be available to the extent of the consideration paid. An anti-avoidance measure ensures that a holder of debt who deals in or holds the same or similar financial arrangements will only be able to take bad debt deductions for the true money at risk. This means that if the  purchase of a debt was funded by a limited recourse arrangement, a bad debt deduction will only be allowed to the extent to which the limited recourse arrangement does not relate to the debt. A deduction is allowed for a bad debt that is written off and that relates to an amount owing under a financial arrangement that is an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services. This is provided the taxpayer’s business includes dealing in the property or services that are the subject of the agreement: s DB 31(4). Following the adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) (see ¶6-135) the accounting treatment for credit impairments of financial assets is governed by NZIAS 39. A complete alignment of the tax treatment of bad debts and the accounting treatment of credit impairments under NZIAS 39 would mean that all provisions for doubtful debts would become deductible for taxation purposes. However, the Government issues paper on the tax consequences of adopting IFRS concluded that this would carry significant revenue costs that were unacceptable. It is therefore currently proposed to maintain the existing tax treatment for bad debts. A credit impairment under NZIAS 39 will only be allowed as a deduction for tax purposes if the bad debt deduction rules in s DB 31 are satisfied. A bad debt deducted as a tax loss A deduction is not allowed to the extent that the debt relates to an amount that the borrower, or another company, has included in a tax loss that has been offset with another group company under s IC 1: s DB 31(5). This provision evidently prevents two deductions for what may be regarded, in substance, as one loss. Debt owed to an estate A debt that is written off as bad by the trustee of a deceased estate may be allowed as a deduction to the extent of trustee income for the income year. If that income is insufficient to absorb the deduction, the deduction may be allowed against the year’s income of a beneficiary who has a vested interest in the capital of the estate, with any residue of the debt to be carried forward to the following  income year and subject to the same treatment until fully deducted: s DB 32. Law: IT07 ss DB 31, DB 32  ¶10-162 Deductibility of bloodstock No deduction is allowed for an expenditure or loss incurred in relation to the racing of bloodstock. The notion of bloodstock refers to a standardbred or thoroughbred horse. See ¶27-300. The inability to claim a deduction reflects the treatment of income from racing as exempt under s CW 47. The above rule is subject to some exceptions. First, a deduction is allowed if the person is in the business of breeding bloodstock, the expenditure is incurred in preparing for disposal bloodstock they are preparing for racing and they do not race the bloodstock. Second, a person, such as a trainer, who prepares bloodstock for racing is allowed a deduction for the outgoings incurred in generating income from that activity. Note that from 1 January 2019, changes to the bloodstock tax rules have enabled new investors in certain bloodstock yearlings to claim tax deductions in relation to that bloodstock as if they had an existing bloodstock breeding business. See ¶27-305. Law: IT07 ss DW 2, YA 1  ¶10-172 Deductibility of books and periodicals A deduction may be allowed for the cost of: ▪ newspapers, journals and periodicals ▪ an updating service for a publication ▪ a book under the $500 threshold for a low-value item excluded from the depreciation regime (see ¶13-054).  The Commissioner’s views on this topic are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 3, March 1998 at 3 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 9, September 1998 at 11. Example 1: An accountancy practice subscribes to CCH, New Zealand Tax Cases. The annual subscription price includes approximately 22 updating reports throughout the year, and a bound volume of tax cases every year or every second year. The subscription price can be claimed as a deduction.  Example 2: An accountant purchases the latest edition of CCH, New Zealand Master Tax Guide. The purchase price can be claimed as a deduction. Arguably, the book is not a capital asset because its use in assisting with the preparation of just one year’s returns would characterise it as a consumable aid. In any event, the cost would be below the $500 threshold for a low-value item.  Journalists were not able to show that the cost of magazines and newspapers purchased to read in their spare time was expenditure wholly, exclusively and necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The reading of the publications was not done in the performance of duties but was merely preparatory for doing work: Fitzpatrick v IR Commrs [1994] BTC 66. A library The initial cost in setting up a library and the purchase of new volumes is subject to the capital limitation. Deduction for the cost may be allowed as a depreciation loss. A professional person such as a doctor or lawyer who maintains a library for work would be allowed a deduction for the cost of doing so. The costs of maintaining a library include: ▪ binding and repairs to existing books ▪ replacement of obsolete books, and ▪ journals and periodicals.  ¶10-182 Deductibility of borrowing costs Under s DB 5 a person is allowed a deduction for expenditure incurred in borrowing money that is used as capital in deriving their income. The deduction allowed overrides the capital limitation, although the other general limitations, such as the private limitation, still apply. Note, however, that the mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG override s DB 5 for expenditure to which that subpart relates, namely expenditure relating to land and certain boats and aircraft used partly for business use and partly for private use (see ¶10-035). Interpretation statement — deductibility of expenditure incurred in borrowing money On 22 November 2013 Inland Revenue released interpretation statement IS 13/03, “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure incurred in borrowing money — section DB 5”, which considers the application of s DB 5 and its relationship with the financial arrangements (FA) rules (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 1, February 2014 at 3). The statement also discusses when borrowing costs may be deductible under the general deductibility provision. IS 13/03 states that it is not possible to provide a comprehensive list of expenditure that will be deductible under s DB 5. However, expenditure that will typically be deductible under s DB 5 (where not required to be taken into account and spread under the FA rules, and where not required to be considered under the mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG) includes: ▪ legal fees in connection with establishing a loan ▪ valuation fees, where the lender requires a valuation ▪ guarantee fees ▪ the passed-on cost of lenders mortgage insurance (where the cost is passed on to the borrower as a “recharge”) ▪ loan procurement fees  ▪ survey fees, where the lender requires the surveying ▪ mortgage brokers’ commissions ▪ costs of arranging bank overdrafts, and ▪ certain expenses relating to debenture issues (such as drafting, advertising and printing prospectuses). Where borrowed money is a revenue item, expenditure incurred in borrowing the money will generally be deductible under s DA 1. Where borrowed money is an addition to capital, expenditure incurred in borrowing the money will not be deductible under s DA 1, because of the capital limitation (s DA 2(1)). However, it may be deductible under s DB 5, which overrides the capital limitation. Section DB 5 allows a person a deduction for expenditure incurred “in borrowing money that is used as capital in deriving their income”. For expenditure to be deductible under s DB 5, the expenditure must be incurred by the taxpayer in borrowing money and the taxpayer must use the borrowed money as capital in the derivation of their income. Refinancing or rollover of a loan Expenditure incurred in refinancing or “rollover” of a loan may constitute fees incurred in the establishment of a new loan, but it will be a question of fact in each case. For example, an extension of the term of a loan contract, made under a provision in the contract contemplating such an extension, may be a variation of the contract and not the establishment of a new loan: see In re Goldstone’s Mortgage [1916] NZLR 489 and Nelson Diocesan Trust Board v Hamilton [1926] NZLR 342 (CA) . Costs incurred in relation to such an extension would not be deductible under s DB 5 because they are not incurred in establishing a loan. Repaying borrowed money Expenditure incurred in repaying borrowed money is not expenditure incurred in borrowing money, so is not deductible under s DB 5. Similarly, costs incurred in discharging a mortgage is not expenditure  incurred in borrowing money. This will be the case irrespective of whether the discharge of mortgage is required to give security to a replacement lender: see Riviera Hotel v MNR [1972] CTC 157 and Neonex International Ltd v R 78 DTC 6,339 (FCC). However, such expenditure may be deductible under the FA rules. The expenditure incurred in discharging a mortgage would be included as consideration in the base price adjustment (which is required in the year the loan is repaid). A negative amount under the base price adjustment is expenditure incurred under the FA rules and constitutes interest that may be deductible under s DB 6 or DB 7. For deductibility of break fees see ¶10-190. Insurance premiums IS 13/03 states that the passed on cost of lenders mortgage insurance is deductible under s DB 5 if it is expenditure the borrower is required to incur to obtain a loan. However, the premium on a life insurance policy required by the lender as security for a loan is not deductible under s DA 1 (because it is capital expenditure) or DB 5 (because it is expenditure incurred in acquiring an asset or benefit other than the loan). This is regardless of the type of life insurance, ie whole of life, term, mortgage repayment insurance, or otherwise. (Note that this was a change in the Commissioner’s approach from an item previously published in 1995.) Expenditure under financial arrangements rules Where borrowing costs are included in income or expenditure calculations under the FA rules, the amount and timing of the borrowing costs will be determined by those rules. As expenditure under the FA rules is interest, whether a deduction is allowable will be determined by s DA 1, DB 6 or DB 7. If the FA rules apply and the taxpayer is not a cash basis person (see s EW 54), or the taxpayer is a cash basis person required to use a spreading method, expenditure that may need to be taken into account and spread under the FA rules includes: ▪ the cost of any lenders mortgage insurance that is passed on to the borrower by being incorporated into the interest rate  ▪ loan application fees, loan establishment or draw down fees, loan procurement fees or broker’s fees — unless they are noncontingent fees or non-integral fees, and ▪ guarantee fees for a guarantee given as security for borrowed money. Cash basis persons are not required to spread income under a financial arrangement. Sections DA 1 and DB 5 are the relevant provisions for determining deductibility of expenditure incurred in borrowing money by a cash basis person, except in the year in which a base price adjustment is required. See ss EW 28–EW 31. In the year in which a base price adjustment is required (eg the year in which a loan is repaid), all consideration paid or payable under the financial arrangement comes into the base price adjustment. This includes any expenditure under a loan that has not already been deducted under s DB 5 or s DA 1. This might include, for example, expenditure under a loan incurred in the year of the base price adjustment, and expenditure paid to the lender to discharge a mortgage or to induce a lender to accept early repayment of a loan. Law: IT07 s DB 5  ¶10-190 Deductibility of break fees A break fee is the fee charged by a lender to a borrower to allow the borrower to repay a fixed interest rate loan earlier than the agreed repayment date or to vary the fixed interest rate under the loan. A break fee is generally charged as compensation for the loss a lender, usually a bank, may have suffered if their current interest rate for a similar loan is lower than the fixed interest rate that applies to the borrower’s loan. This situation arises where the lender has borrowed money from the wholesale money markets at a fixed interest rate, usually with no option for early repayment. Therefore, the lender will have to on-lend the money to another borrower, possibly at a lower interest rate. The cost of borrowing money on the wholesale market may have subsequently fallen. Consequently, the lender has an  “economic cost” to carry until their loan has reached the end of its term. Rulings on break fees Break fees can be incurred in various situations. The Commissioner has issued three public binding rulings to cover the following common situations: ▪ BR Pub 12/01, “Deductibility of break fee paid by a landlord to exit early from a fixed interest rate loan” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 3) ▪ BR Pub 12/02, “Deductibility of break fee paid by a landlord to vary the interest rate of an existing fixed interest rate loan” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 4) ▪ BR Pub 12/03, “Deductibility of break fee paid by a landlord to exit early from a fixed interest rate loan on sale of rental property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 4). The rulings set out the tax treatment of such arrangements. Generally, break fees are deductible where a landlord has entered into a fixed interest rate loan and the money has been used to acquire a property from which rental income is derived or to refinance another loan for that purpose. Where the break fee is paid to repay the loan early, a base price adjustment will be required in the income year the loan is repaid. The break fee will increase the overall negative figure that the base price adjustment provides and will therefore be expenditure incurred and constitute interest. A company, other than a qualifying company, will be entitled to a deduction under s DB 7. A deduction is allowed for other taxpayers, including qualifying companies and look-through companies, under s DB 6 and the general permission in s DA 1. Where the break fee is paid to vary the interest rate under the loan, there is no requirement for a base price adjustment. Taxpayers who are not cash basis persons, and cash basis persons who have chosen to adopt a spreading method, will be required to apply Determination G25 to the variation to the terms of the loan. The amount of the break fee will be  included in the calculation under the determination. This means an adjustment will be made in the year of variation and the deduction of the break fee will effectively be spread over the term of the loan. Cash basis persons will be able to deduct the amount of the break fee when it is incurred under the general permission, in s DA 1, provided the money was borrowed to purchase a property from which rental income is derived. The rulings apply for an indefinite period from the first day of the 2012–13 income year. Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DB 6, DB 7, EW 15, EW 31  ¶10-192 Deductibility of bribes The amount of a bribe given to a public official to obtain a business advantage is not deductible, except in minor cases. No deduction is allowed for a bribe corruptly given to another person with the intent to influence a public official to act, or fail to act, in order to obtain or retain business for the donor, or to obtain an improper advantage for that person in the conduct of business. Whether or not the public official had the authority to act or refrain from acting in relation to the matter, the subject of the bribe does not affect the restriction on deductibility. Some bribes may still give rise to a deduction. This is the case when the bribe is paid wholly or mainly to ensure or expedite the foreign public official’s performance of a routine Government action and the value of the benefit is small. Before 7 November 2015, a deduction was also permitted where the bribe was made outside New Zealand to a foreign public official and the payment was not illegal in the country which the foreign public official represents. Law: IT07 s DB 45  ¶10-200 Capital contributions Businesses that receive a capital contribution for an item of “capital contribution property” must choose to treat the receipt either as  income spread over 10 years (see ¶5-356) or as a reduction in their depreciation base (see ¶13-164) or their expenditure under subpart DO (see ¶27-175, ¶27-365, ¶27-400 and ¶27-410). Once an election is made, it cannot be changed. Capital contribution property is depreciable property owned or to be acquired by the recipient or certain amortisable property under subpart DO. Where the business chooses to apply s DB 64, the asset’s adjusted tax value, base value, cost or value, as applicable, for subpart EE, or the expenditure under subpart DO, is reduced by the amount of the capital contribution. Effectively this means the recipient is not able to claim depreciation or amortisation deductions to the extent that the asset has been paid for by a capital contribution. The amount is not treated as part of the cost of the asset for the purposes of calculating depreciation recovery income. A capital contribution is an amount that is paid by a payer (other than in their capacity of settlor, partner or shareholder of the recipient) to a recipient under an agreement. The amount must not be income of the recipient and must expressly be paid as a contribution for capital contribution property. Insurance payouts to cover the replacement of damaged assets are not capital contributions, except where the insurance payout relates to business interruption (see below). Effectively, a capital contribution is similar in nature to a subsidy for capital expenditure. Previously, capital contributions were generally not taxable as they were capital in nature. See BP Australia v C of T of the Commonwealth of Australia [1966] AC 224 (PC). The recipient may have been able to deduct, by way of depreciation, the cost of the assets acquired with the contribution. It was therefore possible for a recipient to claim deductions for expenditure that had been funded through non-taxable capital receipts. Example: Ben’s Electricity Company is an electricity lines company. On 1 June 2015, a farmer requested that his farmhouse be connected to Ben’s Electricity network. As the work, costing $10,000, would otherwise be uneconomic, Ben’s Electricity required a $6,000 capital contribution from the farmer.  Election to treat as income If Ben’s Electricity Company elects to treat the capital contribution as income, it will return 1/10th of the $6,000 capital contribution as taxable income for the next 10 years. In other words, it will return $600 extra income in its 2015–16 income year and continue to do this until its 2024–25 income year. Election to reduce depreciation base If Ben’s Electricity Company elects to reduce its depreciation base, it will be unable to claim depreciation on the cabling and other assets that make up the new connection to the extent that they were funded by the capital contribution. In other words, it can only claim depreciation deductions on the $4,000 cost for which it bore the financial burden. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 19.  See also ¶13-164. Effect on disposal For the purposes of calculating depreciation recovery, if a person has elected to reduce the depreciation base, the amount of the capital contribution is added back. See ¶13-300. Payouts in relation to business interruption insurance Generally, insurance payouts do not come within the definition of “capital contribution”. However, an exception exists for insurance proceeds received in relation to an interruption or impairment of business activities where the agreement specifies the proceeds are paid as a contribution for capital contribution property. Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, EE 48, YA 1  ¶10-202 Deductibility of company administration costs Section DB 63 allows companies a deduction for all costs incurred in authorising, allocating or processing the payment of a dividend, as well as expenditure incurred in resolving a dispute on any of those matters. This does not include the amount of the dividend itself. Section DB 63B allows listed companies a deduction for expenditure incurred as periodic fees to maintain registration on a recognised stock exchange. Section DB 63C allows companies a deduction for expenditure incurred to hold an annual general meeting of the  shareholders of the company, but denies a deduction for expenditure incurred to hold a special or extraordinary meeting of the shareholders of the company. Commissioner’s statement The Commissioner has addressed the deductibility of a range of corporate administration expenses in an interpretation statement, IS 14/04, “Income tax: deductibility of company costs”, issued in June 2014 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 5). The statement applies from the 2014–15 and subsequent income years. The topics discussed, and the conclusions reached in the statement, may be summarised as follows. Share registry expenses The Commissioner’s view is that expenditure on maintaining the share registry will generally be deductible where the company carries on a business. There is a sufficient relationship between the expenditure and the company’s business because the share registry must be maintained to identify those persons who have the power to make decisions. The expenditure is generally not capital expenditure. The expenditure is recurrent and does not result in the creation of a structural asset or enduring benefit to the company (with the possible exception of expenses incurred in relation to mergers, acquisitions or company migrations). Audit fees Audit fees are incurred to provide shareholders and others with reliable financial information. Such information enables shareholders to exercise their power to control the company and other stakeholders to make decisions regarding their relationship with the company. The Commissioner considers audit fees are deductible because there is a sufficient relationship between annual audit fees and a company’s business and the fees are not capital expenditure. Dividends Expenditure incurred in authorising, allocating or processing the payment of a dividend (including expenditure incurred in resolving a  dispute) is deductible under s DB 63. Shareholder meeting costs Direct expenditure incurred in holding a meeting Direct expenditure incurred in holding a meeting would include expenditure incurred on: ▪ venue hire and any other costs related to preparation of the venue ▪ equipment hire (eg audiovisual equipment) ▪ refreshments provided to those attending the meeting ▪ printing, publishing, postage and advertising of notices of the meeting ▪ preparation of resolutions ▪ travel costs for directors and other persons required to attend the meeting, and ▪ any other costs directly related to physically holding or conducting the meeting. Such expenditure is: ▪ deductible where the expenditure is incurred in holding an annual meeting, regardless of whether the company is carrying on a business or income-earning activity and whether the expenditure is capital in nature, under s DB 63C(1) ▪ not deductible where the expenditure is incurred in holding a special or extraordinary meeting, under s DB 63C(2). Indirect expenditure incurred in relation to meetings of shareholders Indirect expenditure is any other expenditure incurred for, or in preparation for, a meeting of shareholders that is not a direct cost of  physically holding or conducting the meeting. The tax treatment of such expenditure depends on the purpose of the particular meeting. The following table summarises the Commissioner’s view depending upon the purpose of the special meeting: Purpose of meeting  Commissioner’s view of deductibility  Ordinary business purposes of an annual meeting  Deductible where the company is carrying on a business.  Alteration of constitution  Generally non-deductible but may be deductible when the alterations facilitate business operations.  Alteration of shareholder’s rights  Generally non-deductible because general permission not met and capital limitation applies. May be deductible where inseparable from, or ancillary or incidental to, business objectives that meet the general permission.  Arrangements with creditors  Deductible where the company is carrying on a business.  Liquidations  Not deductible. General permission not met and capital limitation applies.  Major transactions  Depends on the facts. Not deductible where incurred after the company has committed to a major transaction because the capital limitation will apply.  Ratifying actions of Ratification under s 177 of the directors or breaches in Companies Act 1993: depends on their duty to the company actions ratified. Ratification of breach of directors’ duty: generally deductible where the  company is carrying on a business. Takeover offers (target company)  Not deductible where incurred to preserve position of existing shareholders or to obtain a benefit of a capital nature. Deductible where incurred to prevent an offer detrimental to the company’s business.  Statutory return filing fees Expenditure relating to standard filing fees incurred pursuant to the Companies Act will be deductible expenditure of a company that is carrying on business or an income-earning activity. As companies are statutorily bound to meet this expenditure, to be both compliant and to remain on the register of companies, the Commissioner considers the commercial necessity for the expenditure means it has the necessary connection to the carrying on of the business and the earning of its income. The expenditure is recurrent and does not result in the creation of a structural asset. Legal or accounting fees associated with company administration costs The tax treatment of legal or accounting fees associated with company administration fees depends on whether the underlying transaction or issue requiring the fees to be incurred is of a capital or revenue nature. For example, accounting or legal fees relating to the acquisition of a capital asset would generally be an item of a capital nature and non-deductible. In contrast, accounting or legal fees associated with dealing with creditors or other operational matters would be of a revenue nature and therefore deductible. However, if the total business-related legal expenditure does not exceed $10,000 for the income year, then the legal expenses will be deductible under s DB 62 in the income year incurred irrespective of whether they are capital. See further at ¶10-680. Listing fees  The Commissioner considers that initial listing fees and any additional listing fees are non-deductible, being expenditure of a capital nature (facilitation of raising fixed capital). However, if initial or additional listing fees are incurred in relation to debt securities, then s DB 5 or the financial arrangements rules in subpart EW may apply depending on the facts of the case (see Interpretation Statement, IS 13/03, “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure incurred in borrowing money — section DB 5” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 1, February 2014 at 3) and ¶10-182). In contrast, s DB 63B supplements the general permission and specifically provides for the deduction of periodic listing fees incurred to maintain registration of a listed company on a recognised exchange. Law: IT07 ss DB 62, DB 63, DB 63B, DB 63C  ¶10-212 Deductibility of compensation and damages A deduction may be allowed under the general permission for a payment of compensation or damages that arose out of the conduct of business activities, provided that the capital limitation or the private limitation do not apply. In Herald and Weekly Times Ltd v FC of T (1932) 48 CLR 113, a newspaper publisher was allowed a deduction for the cost of settling libel claims. The publication of alleged libels was thought by the court to be a regular and almost unavoidable incident of the publication of newspapers. The claims of the person alleged to have been defamed flowed from acts done for no other purpose than earning revenue, namely, the publication of newspapers. A favourable conclusion on deductibility was also reached for a company that paid the legal costs of its directors in unsuccessfully defending criminal charges alleging the payment of secret commissions. The criminal charges attacked the business methods adopted by the company for the sale of its products: Magna Alloys & Research Pty Ltd v FC of T 80 ATC 4542.  A solicitor was allowed a deduction for the amounts paid to clients to compensate them for the defalcations of their funds by the solicitor's bookkeeper: C of T v Webber [1956] NZLR 552. An outlay to ensure cancellation or termination of a business contract may be expected to be allowed as a deduction. The taxpayer in Anglo-Persian Oil Co Ltd v Dale (I of T) (1931) 16 TC 253 was allowed a deduction for the £300,000 paid to obtain cancellation of the contract of an agent responsible for distribution of the taxpayer's products. The agent’s remuneration had become more onerous than anticipated. Following cancellation of the contract, the taxpayer distributed its own products and so was able to achieve a considerable saving in its working expenses. In finding in favour of deductibility, the court noted that no asset or advantage of an enduring benefit was brought into existence by the payment. Similarly, a deduction was allowed in J Gadsden & Co Ltd v C of IR (1964) 14 ATD 18 for a payment to cancel a knowhow agreement so as to achieve an economy in expenses. Vodaphone Cellular Ltd v Shaw (HMIT) [1997] BTC 247 concerned a claim to deduct the £30m paid to cancel an agreement for the supply of technical assistance in setting up a mobile telephone network. The taxpayer negotiated cancellation of the supply agreement when it emerged that alternative technology was available elsewhere at a cheaper cost. The payment was one to get rid of a future liability of a revenue nature, being a payment for services, and the court thought that it was appropriate that the payment should have the same character as that liability. Compensation paid to an employee in conclusion of a personal grievance claim is likely to be allowed as a deduction. A payment to secure the removal of an unsatisfactory director or employee is referable only to current business operations and that stamps the outlay with the character of a revenue disbursement: Buckley & Young Ltd v C of IR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271. See also ¶3-468.  ¶10-220 Deductibility of computer software expenditure  The deductibility of computer software expenditure depends upon the nature of the expenditure incurred. For example, expenditure on developing computer software that creates an asset to be used in the taxpayer’s business can be expected to be of a capital nature that may be allowed as a deduction by way of a depreciation loss. The same outcome applies for expenditure incurred in creating a website; see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 8, August 2000 at 21. On the other hand, expenditure on purchasing computer software with a cost of $500 or less can be claimed as an immediate deduction. For a list of the different types of computer software expenditure, and the corresponding income tax treatment, see further at ¶13-430. Expenditure on computer software may be eligible for the deduction allowed for research and development (¶10-850). The Commissioner undertook a comprehensive analysis of the nature of computer software in the interpretation guideline, “Nonresident software suppliers’ payments derived from New Zealand — income tax treatment” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 11, November 2003 at 8). The purpose of the statement was to explore the circumstances in which the purchase of computer software from a non-resident supplier would attract non-resident withholding tax. In doing so, the statement touches on the distinction between revenue and capital and therefore contains some indication of the outlays the Commissioner may accept as deductible when the transaction is conducted between resident parties. Unsuccessful software development costs Section DB 40B allows taxpayers an immediate deduction for the costs associated with unsuccessful software development where the taxpayer incurs expenditure on the development of software for use in the taxpayer’s business, the development is abandoned before the copyright in the software is depreciable property and, if the development had been completed, the copyright in the software would have been depreciable property. The deduction is available to the extent to which no other deduction has been allowed