 direct or indirect ownership by Māori authorities. However, there are some exceptions. The revised definition expressly allows for distributions by trustees to tax charities that have no influence over the LTC or trust from which they receive the distribution, thus providing for true charitable gifts or donations.  To prevent Māori authorities and tax charities incurring the compliance cost of converting their LTC interests to limited partnerships, Māori authorities and charities that had interests in LTCs before 3 May 2016 (the date of the introduction of the relevant legislation) were grandparented. The definition of a “grandparented Māori authority” includes not only direct ownership interests, but also a Māori authority beneficiary of a trust that was an owner in an LTC and a Māori authority that had entered into an arrangement to become an LTC owner before 3 May 2016. The definition of a “grandparented charity” provides for charities that, before 3 May 2016, were owners of an LTC or had entered into an arrangement to become an LTC owner. Grandparented Māori authorities and charities are able to remain owners of an LTC. Foreign income restriction As an LTC is not intended as a conduit vehicle, with effect from 1 April 2017, an LTC’s foreign income is restricted to the greater of $10,000 and 20% of its gross income when more than 50% of the LTC’s shares are held by foreign LTC holders. A “foreign LTC holder” is a non-resident, and includes a trustee of a trust if the trust has a non-resident settlor, but only to the extent that non-resident settlors have provided settlements to the trust. For example, if a trust held 50% of the shares in a company, and 50% of the value of settlements made on the trust were by non-residents, then 25% of the ownership interests in the company would be considered to be held by foreign LTC holders when assessing whether the 50% threshold has been reached. For these purposes, settlements arising from services provided for less than market value are ignored. Example 2:  Company Z has two shareholders, Trust D which has a 60% shareholding in Company Z and Steve, who holds a 40% shareholding. Steve is an individual who is resident in New Zealand. Trust D is a trust that received $100,000 in cash settlements: $60,000 of the settlements were made by a non-resident settlor and $40,000 were made by a resident settlor. Trust D’s 60% shareholding in Company Z is therefore split between treated as being held by non-residents and residents on a 36:24 basis. Overall, 36% of Company Z’s shares are considered to be held by foreign LTC holders and 64% (40% and 24%) held by residents. Because of this, the foreign income restrictions will not apply to Company Z. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 37.  Transitional provision With the changes to the criteria for an LTC, some LTCs lost their status as LTCs on enactment of the relevant legislation. A transitional provision, s HZ 4E, enabled the tax book values to be rolled over to the ordinary company for the first income year the changes came into force. The section provides that when an entity that is an LTC at the end of the 2016–17 or 2017–18 income year ceases to be an LTC because of the changes, the company is treated as having the tax position it had immediately before it ceases, ignoring the look-through rule, and the owners are treated as not having that position. Section HB 4(6), which provides for a transfer at market value on cessation, does not apply. The company  will be able to transition to being an ordinary company without triggering the exit adjustment requirements in s HB 4(6). Example 3: Speculator Ltd is a LTC that is involved in property renting and speculation. On 1 May 2015, Speculator Ltd acquired land for $500,000 with the intention of reselling. Speculator Ltd sells the land on 5 August 2020 for $700,000. On 1 June 2017, Speculator Ltd made a distribution to a corporate beneficiary. As a result, Speculator Ltd will lose LTC status as a result of the eligibility changes in the new rules. When Speculator Ltd becomes an ordinary company it will be treated as having acquired the land on 1 May 2015 for $500,000 and with the intention of resale. Any increase in the value of the property will not be realised upon Speculator Ltd exiting the LTC rules. Instead any revenue account gains will be brought to account when Speculator Ltd actually sells the land — in this case on 5 August 2020 — realising a $200,000 revenue account gain. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 37.  Law: IT07 ss HZ 4E, YA 1  ¶19-170 Eligibility of owners of an LTC Only certain persons may hold shares in a look-through company (LTC). Shareholders of an LTC must be either: ▪ natural persons, or ▪ trustees (this includes corporate trustees), or ▪ another LTC. An LTC can be a shareholder of another LTC because of the lookthrough nature of the company, ie shares held by an LTC are treated as being held by its owners. In contrast, ordinary companies and qualifying companies cannot hold shares in an LTC. Where an LTC has individual shareholders the test is easy to apply and it will be simple to ascertain whether the criterion of five or fewer owners has been met. However, where an LTC has more than five  individual shareholders, or where trustees hold shares, the lookthrough owner test needs to be carefully considered. Look-through counted owners An LTC must have five or fewer “look-through counted owners”. Although this term relates to shareholding, it is not interchangeable with the terms “owner” or “shareholder”. This will be apparent when, for example, an LTC is the parent company of another LTC. Natural persons Each individual natural person with an interest in an LTC is a lookthrough counted owner. Natural person shareholders of companies that have derived LTC income as beneficiary income in the current income year or one of the last three income years are treated as look-through counted owners. This is because the company itself is not regarded as a look-through counted owner. The test counts the natural persons who have a voting interest in relation to the company, directly or indirectly, as the look-through counted owners. Before the 2017–18 income year, natural person beneficiaries of trusts who derived LTC income as beneficiary income in the current income year, or any one of the previous three income years, were treated as look-through counted owners. However, this was considered too narrow and with effect from 1 April 2017 the definition of “look-through counted owner” was amended to count all natural persons who receive distributions from a trust, irrespective of whether they are from the LTC or other sources, or whether they are received by the beneficiary as beneficiary income, trustee income, trust capital or corpus. This ensures the test counts all persons who, though they may not receive beneficiary income, nevertheless benefit from the trust owning LTC shares. Given that the counted owner test looks back to the current and preceding three income years, to ensure the new strengthened test only applies prospectively it applies only to income earned from the beginning of the 2017–18 income year. Income earned and distributed to  beneficiaries or retained by the trust before the 2017–18 income year is counted under the previous rules. The transition is summarised in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 33, as follows. For income year  Which test to apply  Previous Previous Previous Current year 3 year 2 year 1 year  2017–18  Old test  2014–15  2015–16  2016–17  —  New test  —  —  —  2017–18  Old test  2015–16  2016–17  —  —  New test  —  —  2017–18  2018–19  Old test  2016–17  —  —  —  New test  —  2017–18  2018–19  2019–20  Old test  —  —  —  —  New test  2017–18  2018–19  2019–20  2020–21  2018–19 2019–20 2020–21  To ensure the strengthened test incorporating all distributions to beneficiaries does not result in double counting of owners, trustees are now only look-through counted owners when no beneficiaries of the trust are look-through counted owners (see below). Example 1: A LTC is 100% owned by Trust B. Trust B has made the following distributions: 2015–16 income year: Distribution of LTC-sourced income to two beneficiaries. 2016–17 income year: Distribution of non-LTC sourced income to two beneficiaries. 2017–18 income year: Distribution of non-LTC sourced income to two beneficiaries. 2018–19 income year: No distributions to date. All of the beneficiaries are separate individuals.  For the 2018–19 income year, the LTC will have four look-through counted owners. This is made up of the two beneficiaries who received distributions in the 2015–16 income year and the two beneficiaries who received distributions in the 2017–18 income year. The two beneficiaries who received distributions in the 2016–17 income year are not look-through counted owners as distributions for the 2016–17 income year are counted under the old rules which do not consider distributions of non-LTC sourced income. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 34.  Relatives For the purposes of the LTC rules the look-through counted owners test requires analysis of relationships between individual shareholders. Shareholders related by blood relationship (to the second degree), by marriage, civil union or de facto relationship, or by adoption are counted as a single owner for the purposes of this test. A connection by marriage, civil union or de facto relationship extends to a second degree relationship, but adoption extends only to a first degree relationship. The relationship between a step-parent and a step-child is a seconddegree relationship. The five or fewer test is not broken by the death of one person, or the dissolution of the marriage, civil union or relationship, if the shareholders of the LTC were counted as one owner before the death or dissolution. Trustees Before the 2017–18 income year, trustees of a trust were not counted owners if all LTC income was distributed as beneficiary income for the current income year and all of the last three income years. Put another way, if the income from an LTC was retained by a trust and not paid out as beneficiary income during those income years then the trustees would be counted as one look-through counted owner. However, the change to the definition of “look-through counted owner” to count all distributions to beneficiaries (discussed above) also required a change to the way trustees are counted to avoid the  potential for double counting of owners. This is because the previous test counted a trustee that retained LTC income and ignored the future distribution of that income as “trustee income” to beneficiaries. From the 2017–18 income year, however, all distributions are counted in the hands of the beneficiary. Therefore, the provision has been amended to ensure that a trustee is a look-through counted owner only when no beneficiaries of the trust are look-through counted owners. Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶19-175 Electing to become an LTC A company can only make use of the look-through company (LTC) rules if it meets all the requirements to be eligible (see ¶19-165) and has filed an election with Inland Revenue. For a company to become an LTC, a look-through company election form (IR862) must be completed. All owners of a look-through interest must sign the election form. A legal guardian or legal representative must sign the form on behalf of owners who are under 18 years old, or for any owner who cannot legally sign the form. The director or authorised agent must sign the LTC election form confirming that all owners have signed the election form and that the company meets all the criteria for eligibility to be an LTC. If a company ceases to meet the criteria to be an LTC, or if one of the owners revokes the election (see ¶19-180), the company cannot re-elect to be an LTC for the income year it ceased to be an LTC, or for any of the following two income years. Due date for elections The deadline for making an effective election depends upon whether the company is an existing company or a newly incorporated company. Due to the fact that elections relate to the income year of a company electing to be an LTC, the due date for filing an election is dependent upon the company’s balance date. LTC elections must be received by the Commissioner:  ▪ for newly incorporated companies or inactive companies, before the last day for filing the first return of income, or ▪ before the start of the income year stated in the election for commencement of LTC status in the case of other existing companies. Late filing of look-through company election If an election is filed after the start of the income year it relates to, or after the due date for the company’s first income tax return, then the election will usually be processed with an effective date of the start of the next income year. However, the Commissioner has the discretion to accept late or defective elections in exceptional circumstances. Determination of whether exceptional circumstances exist will depend on the facts of each case but usually relate to an event outside the control of the owners, director or agent that could not have been reasonably anticipated. Tax book values of converted company A company that elects to become an LTC is treated as having, as an LTC, the same status, intention, purpose and tax book values it had as a company for its assets, liabilities, and associated legal rights and obligations. Impact of COVID-19 virus on due dates for elections LTC elections for new companies For new companies electing into the LTC regime with effect from the 2019 income year, the deadline to file an election was extended to 30 June 2020 (see COV 20/01, “Variation to section HB 13(3)(b) of the Income Tax Act 2007”, 13 May 2020 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 3)). LTC elections for existing companies Although LTC elections for existing companies, that were previously required to file an income tax return, electing to be an LTC for the 2020–21 year were due by 31 March 2020, the Commissioner can accept late LTC elections if there are exceptional circumstances and  the elections are signed and dated in the 2020–21 income year. The Commissioner has stated that she considers COVID-19 is an exceptional circumstance and may allow late elections that are fully signed and dated during the 2020–21 income year. However, the elections must be filed as soon as possible and not left to later in the year merely for convenience. Example Johns Fashion Ltd is an existing company that had previously filed a company tax return and its shareholders and director were intending on electing the company into the LTC regime for the 2021 income year. This election was due by 31 March 2020; the day before the start of the 2021 income year. However, due to COVID-19, the required LTC election form was unable to be completed. It was provided to Inland Revenue on 5 May 2020, which was as soon as possible due to COVID-19. Johns Fashion Ltd’s tax agent writes to Inland Revenue and provides details of the exceptional circumstances relating to COVID-19 that prevented the election being made on time. As the election was filed as soon as possible, the late LTC election is allowed. Example adapted from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 19 May 2020  Law: IT07 ss HB 1, HB 13  ¶19-180 Revoking LTC elections Any of the owners may revoke an election; they need not be one of the original owners to do so. The revocation notice (IR 896) must be received by the Commissioner before the start of the income year to which it applies. In other words, revocation applies from the start of the income year following the notification of revocation. A copy of the notice should be sent to the director and all other owners to ensure that they are aware that revocation has taken place and consequently there is a change in status for the company. The Commissioner can accept late revocation notices in exceptional circumstances. A revocation notice may be ignored if the owner issuing the revocation notice disposes of all their interests in the LTC and the  person acquiring their interest advises the Commissioner (before the start of the income year) that the previous owner’s revocation notice is to be reversed. If an election for LTC status is revoked, then the company cannot become an LTC in either of the following two income years. Law: IT07 ss HB 1(1)–(3), HB 13(4)  ¶19-185 Eligible investments of an LTC There is no restriction on the type of investment income an LTC may derive. Foreign-sourced amount Unlike qualifying companies, which cannot derive more than $10,000 of foreign non-dividend income in an income year (see ¶19-040), there is no limit on the amount of foreign-sourced amounts that an LTC can derive, subject to one exception. With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, a limitation applies for those LTCs where more than 50% of the LTC’s shares are held by foreign LTC holders. In that case, the LTC’s foreign income is restricted to the greater of $10,000 and 20% of its gross income. See further at ¶19-165. CFC and FIF income There is no restriction on interests held by an LTC in a controlled foreign company (CFC) or a foreign investment fund (FIF), unlike a qualifying company or loss-attributing qualifying company that may not hold income interests of 10% or more in a FIF.  ¶19-190 Treatment of losses on transition to an LTC Losses carried forward by a company before becoming a lookthrough company (LTC) are extinguished. The same treatment extends to a company that amalgamates with an LTC.  This feature may make the transition to an LTC an unattractive option for those companies with loss balances that shareholders wish to deduct from personal income. Losses carried forward by a qualifying company that elected to be an LTC under the transitional rules (see ¶19-150) may be used by its owners against their future LTC income. For CFC or FIF losses carried forward, the normal ring-fencing rules under subpart IQ apply (see ¶26-042 and ¶26-145). Law: IT07 ss DV 23, HB 3  ¶19-195 Treatment of untaxed reserves on transition to an LTC First year income The look-through company (LTC) entry tax adjustment applies when a company elects to become an LTC. It triggers a tax liability on unimputed retained earnings by deeming the company to have been liquidated immediately before conversion. This adjustment is intended to ensure that reserves that would generate taxable income for shareholders if distributed before entering the LTC regime and that would be able to be distributed tax-free once the company becomes an LTC, are taxed to owners at the time of entry. Calculating untaxed reserves With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, the formula for calculating untaxed reserves ensures that the taxable income that arises to LTC owners as a result of the calculation is taxed at each shareholder’s personal tax rate and, for QCs converting to LTCs, that the entry tax formula does not tax owners of QCs any more than they would be if they liquidated before the conversion. The formula treats the resulting income that flows through to the LTC owners as a dividend, with imputation credits attached where available, thereby ensuring the income is taxed at the owners’ personal tax rates in all cases. (This overcomes the problem with the  previous formula, which based the calculation on the company tax rate and could lead to under- or over-taxation, depending on the owner’s marginal tax rate.) A person’s income is calculated under the following formula: (untaxed reserves + reserves imputation credit) × effective interest The amount of untaxed reserves is calculated using the formula: dividends − assessable income − exit exemption where: dividends is the amount that would be taxable dividends on distribution following a deemed liquidation assessable income is assessable income less allowable deductions that would arise on the deemed liquidation, for example depreciation recovered exit exemption is the exit dividends that, if the company had previously been an LTC and is now re-entering the LTC rules, would be attributed to any retained reserves from the previous LTC period that have not since been distributed. The reserves imputation credit is the total amount given by the formula below, up to the maximum permitted ratio for the untaxed reserves, and is treated as an attached imputation credit included in the dividend calculated. The formula is: current credits + future amounts where: current credits is the company’s ICA balance on the relevant day future amounts is an amount of income tax payable for an earlier income year but not paid on or before the relevant day, less refunds due of the earlier income year but paid after the relevant day.  The effective interest is the person’s effective look-through interest for the LTC. This formula treats the retained income and imputation credits that would arise on liquidation as being distributed to the individual LTC owners. The owners will need to include the income and imputation credits in their returns of income. Example: X Co is an ordinary company. It has two shareholders: Amy, who has 40% of the shareholding in X Co, and Ben, who holds 60% of the shareholding in X Co. $500,000 of equity was put into X Co, which X Co used to purchase a $500,000 house it acquired with the intention of resale. The house is now worth $700,000. X Co also has $72,000 of retained earnings and $28,000 of imputation credits from rent received from the house. X Co converts to a LTC. As a result, an entry tax calculation is required. The formula is: (untaxed reserves + reserves imputation credit) × effective interest. The reserves imputation credit is $28,000. Amy’s effective interest is 40% and Ben’s effective interest is 60%. Untaxed reserves Untaxed reserves are calculated using the formula: Dividends − assessable income − exit exemption. The dividends are the amounts that would be dividends if X Co sold its $700,000 house, then liquidated. If X Co liquidated it would have $272,000 of dividends, being the $700,000 cash from the property, the $72,000 of retained earnings, minus the subscribed capital of $500,000. The assessable income of X Co would be $200,000, being the total assessable income that X Co received from the sale of the house (as it was held on revenue account). The exit exemption would not apply as X Co has not previously been a LTC. As a result, the untaxed reserves are $72,000. As a result, the entry tax calculations are: Amy: (72,000 + 28,000) × 0.4 = $40,000 Ben: (72,000 + 28,000) × 0.6 = $60,000. These are treated as dividends and imputation credits may be attached to them. Amy may have up to $11,200 of imputation credits attached, and Ben may have up to $16,800 of imputation credits attached. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 40.  Qualifying companies with limited imputation credits For QCs that elect into the LTC rules, the entry tax formula before 1 April 2017 applied tax to all un-imputed retained earnings except eligible capital profits. This was inconsistent with the QC rules, which allow for tax-free distribution of un-imputed earnings as exempt dividends to QC shareholders. From 1 April 2017, an additional formula therefore covers situations when a QC has insufficient credits to cover distributions of all reserves. ((balances ÷ tax rate − balances) + balances imputation credit) × effective interest where: balances is the balance of the company’s imputation credit account immediately before becoming an LTC, adjusted for unpaid income tax and income tax refunds not received tax rate is the corporate tax rate for the income year before the income year in which the company becomes an LTC balances imputation credit is the amount of the item balances above and is treated as an attached imputation credit included in the dividend calculated effective interest is the person’s effective look-through interest for the LTC. Law: IT07 ss CB 32C, CX 63  ¶19-200 LTC: Allocation of income and deductions The income, expenses, tax credits, gains and losses of an LTC are allocated to owners in accordance with the owner’s effective lookthrough interest in the company. The income and deductions available from the LTC may be allocated to the owner of an effective look-through interest even though the  owner did not hold the interest at a particular time, such as before the company assumed LTC status. If the owner’s voting interest or market interest varies during the income year the owner may use the weighted average interest to determine their look-through interest. If the LTC has a market value circumstance in the year, the owner’s effective look-through interest is calculated as the average of the owner’s voting interest and market value interest in the LTC for the income year. Alternatively, owners can prepare part-year accounts and allocate income and deductions in accordance with their actual interests held. Owners may choose which of the above two methods they use to allocate income and deductions, unless the Commissioner requires the LTC to allocate assessable income in accordance with actual interests held by the owners where the income is $3m or more. See s HB 1(5)(b)(i). Because an LTC is transparent for income tax purposes, allowable deductions can be claimed by the owners of the LTC, rather than claimed by the company. Law: IT07 ss CB 32B, DV 22, HB 1(5), HB 2  ¶19-203 LTCs and interest deductibility Interest may be deductible under s DB 6 provided that the deduction for interest is incurred by the LTC in deriving its assessable income or incurred in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving its assessable income. See ¶10-021 for the commentary on the general permission relating to deductibility. Deductibility is subject to the loss limitation rule (see ¶19-215). This ensures that owners can only offset losses to the extent that the losses reflect the owner’s economic loss. Section HB 1(4) attributes the action of the LTC to its owners. Owners are treated as carrying on the activities of the LTC, having  the same status, intention and purpose as the company. Owners are also treated as holding property that the LTC holds, being party to any transaction entered into by the LTC and doing a thing that the LTC does. The Commissioner’s view is that to borrow funds to purchase a “something” that will derive assessable income for the LTC is included in this definition of “a thing”. The effect is that this provision treats the LTC’s action as being those of the owner for income tax purposes. The provision does not work in reverse. The underlying principle that supports the deductibility of interest is the use of the borrowed funds by the LTC, not the use of the funds by the person in their personal capacity. Commissioner’s statements Where a person sells their private home at its fair market value to an LTC as a rental asset to be rented to a third party on an arm’s length basis and the LTC borrows money to fund the purchase, an interest deduction will be allowed. Inland Revenue confirmed this in question we have been asked, QB 11/03, “Income tax — look-through companies and interest deductibility” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 10, December 2011 at 16), and also that the tax avoidance provision, s BG 1, will not apply, in question we have been asked, QB 12/11, “Income tax — look-through companies, rental properties and avoidance” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 7, August 2012 at 110). The Commissioner has also released questions we have been asked, QB 12/08: “Income tax — look-through companies: interest deductibility on funds borrowed to repay shareholder current accounts” and QB 12/09: “Income tax — look-through companies: interest deductibility where funds are borrowed to make a payment to shareholders to reflect an asset revaluation”. QB 12/08 considers whether interest is deductible where an LTC borrows money on arm’s length terms to repay current account loans from its shareholders. It concludes that interest will be deductible to the extent the borrowing replaces current account loans from shareholders that were used directly in the LTC’s assessable or excluded income-earning activity or business. The LTC must be carrying on an income-earning activity or business for the purpose of  deriving assessable or excluded income both at the time the funds are borrowed and at the time interest on those funds is payable. Interest will not be deductible to the extent the borrowed funds are used to replace current year income. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 6, July 2012 at 70. QB 12/09 considers whether interest is deductible where an LTC borrows money in the following circumstances: ▪ the LTC purchases an asset from which it derives income ▪ the asset is subsequently re-valued above its purchase price, and ▪ the LTC uses the borrowed money to make payments to its shareholders reflecting the increase in the asset’s value. QB 12/09 concludes that the interest will not be deductible under the principle from Roberts and Smith (see ¶10-650). A deduction may be available under general interest deductibility principles where the relevant nexus is met (for example, if the funds were advanced to shareholders at a market rate of interest). See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 6, July 2012 at 72. Law: IT07 ss DB 6, HB 1  ¶19-205 Taxation of working owners of an LTC The owners of an LTC are allowed a deduction for payments made to a working owner. The usual PAYE rules apply to the payments made to the working owner. For an owner to be considered a “working owner” that person must meet the definition set out in s YA 1, which requires that his or her share of salary be paid under a written employment contract and that they personally and actively perform their duties under that contract. This rule applies as long as the company is not wholly or mainly engaged in the business of investing money or in holding or dealing in shares, securities, investments or land.  For FBT purposes, a working owner is not an employee. Instead, the benefit provided by the LTC to the shareholder is considered as a distribution of profits to that shareholder. Law: IT07 ss DC 3B, RD 5(3B), YA 1  ¶19-210 Anti-avoidance rules relating to LTCs The first anti-avoidance measure relating to LTCs applies when two or more owners are relatives and one of those relatives is less than 20 years old. In that case, the effective look-through interests, and consequently the income and deductions, allocated to an owner may be adjusted by the Commissioner, having regard to the services rendered and value of contributions made by the various owners to the company. See s GB 25B. The rules relating to excessive remuneration paid to a relative also apply to an LTC. See s GB 23. The rules do not apply if (s GB 24): ▪ there is a written contract ▪ the relative is 20 years old or older ▪ the contract is binding for a period of at least three years, and ▪ the employee has real control over their income. Question we’ve been asked In August 2014, Inland Revenue released Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 14/09, “Income Tax — Meaning of ‘Excessive Remuneration’ and ‘Excessive Profits or Losses’ Paid or Allocated to Relatives, Partners, Shareholders or Directors” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 9, October 2014 at 22). The item asks when the payment of remuneration or allocation of profits or losses is considered to be excessive for the purposes of ss GB 23 to GB 25B. With respect to look-through companies, the item concludes that any remuneration, profits or losses will be considered excessive where:  ▪ the amount paid is more than a reasonable reward for the services provided by a relative ▪ the amount allocated under the LTC rules to a relative (aged under 20) who owns an effective look-through interest in an LTC exceeds a reasonable amount having regard to the value of their contributions by way of services, capital and any other relevant matters. The Commissioner considers an amount of remuneration is “reasonable” if it is appropriate or fair for the services provided. The item states the following criteria the Commissioner will consider for determining a reasonable payment for services rendered: ▪ The nature of the services and the circumstances in which they will be or are performed. ▪ The knowledge and skills required to carry out the services, including any particular qualifications. ▪ The amount of payment that the person carrying out the duties would be paid by another independent employer for like services. ▪ The locality where the duties are being performed. ▪ The amount the taxpayer would be prepared to pay an arm’s length employee undertaking similar duties. Income from personal services Where the personal service attribution rule applies (see ¶33-325), then for the purposes of applying the attribution rule, an LTC is treated as the associated entity and not a transparent tax entity. The net income derived by the LTC will be attributed to the person performing the services. Example:  A company is owned 99% by a family trust and 1% by an individual. The company is an LTC. The company provides consulting services to a single customer. The net income derived by the LTC will be attributed to the individual who performs the services.  Law: IT07 ss GB 23, GB 24, GB 25B, GB 29(2)(c)  ¶19-215 The deduction limitation rule for LTCs The deduction limitation rule was previously one of the key features of the look-through company (LTC) regime. However, it was concluded that the rule resulted in compliance costs that outweighed the benefits of the rule in most cases, but that the rule still had relevance for LTCs working together in partnership or as a joint venture. This is because in many respects they are an alternative to limited partnerships, where a deduction limitation rule is appropriate. They can also be potentially widely-held vehicles. Thus, with effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, the deduction limitation rule has been restricted to LTCs in partnership or joint venture. The purpose of the rule is to ensure that the tax deductions claimed by an owner correlate to the economic loss suffered by that owner. The deductions an owner can claim in an income year are limited to their investment (called the owner’s basis, see ¶19-220) in the LTC. If the deductions exceed the investment, then they are limited in accordance with the deduction limitation rule. Losses in excess of the owner’s basis are carried forward for deduction in future income years. These carried forward deductions will remain subject to the deduction limitation rule in future years. If at any point the LTC becomes an ordinary company, the owner may apply the restricted deductions against future dividends received from the company. When an owner ceases to have an interest in the LTC, then the restricted deductions cannot be used unless the owner reacquires an interest in the same LTC at a later date.  For those no longer covered by the rule, deductions previously restricted and carried forward by the rule were automatically freed up from the 2017–18 income year and available for offsetting against income from that year onwards. To ensure LTC owners do not claim excessive deductions, the existing anti-avoidance rule in s GB 50 (which treats transactions between partners and their partnerships entered into for a consideration greater or less than market value for an avoidance purpose as taking place at market value) was extended to LTCs and their owners with effect from 1 April 2017. Law: IT07 ss GB 50, HB 11, HB 12  ¶19-220 Calculating owner’s basis for LTCs The owner’s basis for the owner of the effective look-through interest is calculated at the end of the income year according to the following formula: investments − distributions + income − deductions − disallowed amount where: investment is the sum of: □ market value of the LTC shares at the time of acquisition by the owner based on the equity, goods or assets introduced by the owner to the LTC □ loans by the owner to the LTC, including any current account credit balance, and □ secured amounts (see below). distribution is the sum of all payments by the LTC to the owner, such as dividends and a current account debit balance, but does not include salary paid to a working owner. income is the owner’s share of all income, including exempt income, excluded income, FIF income and capital gains, from  the current year and preceding income years in which the company was an LTC. The owner’s share of the LTC income is increased where the LTC has FIF income and the dividend actually distributed by the FIF to the LTC is higher than the amount of FIF income as calculated using the owner’s chosen calculation method. In the case of a FIF loss, the actual dividend amount will be included (see example below). deductions is the owner’s share of all deductions and capital losses in preceding income years in which the company was an LTC. disallowed amount is investments made by the owner within 60 days of the end of the LTC’s income year if these are distributed or reduced within 60 days after the last day of the income year. This is subject to a $10,000 de minimis rule, ie if the total reduction of investments within 60 days is less than $10,000, this amount can be ignored. Example 1: Tina is the sole owner of Button Ltd, an LTC. Button Ltd derives gross trading income of $100 and also receives dividends from a foreign investment fund (FIF) of $20. There are no expenses. Tina selects the comparative value method for calculating her FIF income from her attributing FIF interests. Tina has FIF income of $5 for her interests in this attributing FIF, held via Button Ltd. Under s HB 1, $105 of income is attributed to Tina from Button Ltd. This $105 is included in the “income” element of her owner’s basis formula, in s HB 11(7)(a). Tina is considered to be at economic risk for the full $20 FIF dividend received in that income year. Therefore the $15 difference between the actual dividend and the amount of FIF income calculated under the FIF rules is added to her owner’s basis. dividend − FIF amount = $20 − $5 = $15  Secured amounts To calculate “secured amounts” it is important to understand the meaning of “guarantor”, “owner’s associate” and “recourse property”. Guarantor  Guarantor means a person who has an interest in an LTC, if: ▪ the person guarantees the LTC’s debt, or ▪ an owner’s associate guarantees the LTC debt. Owner’s associate An “owner’s associate” is a person who does not have an effective look-through interest in the LTC, but is connected with the owner, such as a relative, or a trustee who is associated in their capacity as trustee. A person who is not an owner of an LTC, and is not an owner’s associate, will be a guarantor (a “third party guarantor”) if they provide a guarantee or indemnity for the LTC’s debt. Example 2: Mary owns 80% of the shares in Hapsburg Ltd, an LTC. Philip, Mary’s husband, owns the remaining 20% of the shares. Philip guarantees a bank loan made to Hapsburg Ltd. Philip is an owner guarantor. Mary is not a guarantor because she has not provided a guarantee, and although Philip is her relative, he is not her owner’s associate because he is a shareholder in Hapsburg Ltd.  Recourse property “Recourse property” means property to which a creditor has recourse, to enforce a guarantee or indemnity for the relevant debt, if the guarantee or indemnity expressly provides recourse to only that property. Example 3: William has provided a limited recourse guarantee for his son Charles’s company, Dover Ltd, which has a bank loan of $300,000. William uses his two rental properties as recourse property. Due to some severe storm damage, the rental properties have recently declined in value. Their current market value is $140,000 each and both have  an outstanding mortgage loan of $30,000 that would take creditor priority in the event that the properties are sold. The amount that Charles may include in his owner’s basis is $220,000, being the market value of the recourse property ($280,000), less any higher ranking charges ($60,000). The net market value of the recourse property is attributed to each of the owner guarantors to the extent of their ownership interest in the recourse property, or to the extent of an owner’s associate’s interests in the recourse property, where the limited recourse guarantee is provided by an owner’s associate. If there is more than one owner guarantor using the same recourse property for their guarantees, the net market value of the recourse property will be divided among the relevant owner guarantors.  Secured amounts is the lesser of: (a) the amount of LTC debt for which the person is a guarantor (see above), divided by the total number of guarantors, and (b) the market value of the recourse property (see above) for the secured debt to the extent of the interest that the person and their owner’s associates have in it, net of higher ranking calls whether actual, future or contingent, divided by the total number of owner guarantors (ie guarantees made by an owner or an owner’s associate). Paragraph (a) is expected to be the operative provision for nearly all LTC owners. This is because para (b) concerns guarantees under which the creditor’s recourse is expressly limited, which is not common in practice. Example 4: Mary owns 80% of the shares in Hapsburg Ltd. The remaining 20% of the shares are owned by Mary’s husband, Philip. Hapsburg Ltd is an LTC. It receives a bank loan of $100,000. Philip guarantees this loan. Philip, the minority shareholder, is the only owner guarantor and can include $100,000 as a “secured amount” in his owner’s basis. Mary, the majority shareholder, cannot include anything, as she is not a guarantor. If Mary also provided a guarantee for the bank loan, there would be two owner guarantors, Philip and Mary. The $100,000 debt would be divided by two, and Philip and Mary could each include $50,000 in their owner’s basis.  Note that the debt is divided by the number of guarantors. The fact that Mary and Philip hold different proportions of shares in Hapsburg Ltd is not relevant to the apportionment of the debt.  Examples adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 10, December 2012 at 47. Law: IT07 ss HB 11, HZ 4C  ¶19-222 Debt remission for LTCs Debt remission, being the extinguishing of a debtor’s liability by operation of law or forgiveness by the creditor, generally gives rise to debt remission income to the debtor under the financial arrangement rules. Self-remission However, remission income does not arise to either an LTC owner or a partner who remits a debt owed to them by the LTC or partnership, including a limited partnership (referred to as “self-remission”). The financial arrangements rules exclude self-remission by a shareholder of an LTC or a partner in a partnership and enable the shareholder or partner who has lent money to an LTC or partnership to take a deduction equal to their proportion of debt remission income of the LTC or partnership. The shareholder or partner will have a negative base price adjustment in their capacity as creditor that neutralises any income attributed to them as debtor in their capacity as owner or partner. The same result is achieved in circumstances when an LTC owner or a partner in a partnership dispose of their interests in the financial arrangement. Example 1: Mr Church owns 80% of the shares in TE Limited, a look-through company (LTC). Barney owns the other 20% of the shares. The company owes Mr Church $100,000 that it will not be able to pay back. Mr Church wants to forgive the debt as there is no likelihood of recovering it.  If Mr Church forgives the debt, will remission income arise? The loan from Mr Church is a financial arrangement. As LTCs are transparent entities for tax purposes, Mr Church is treated as borrowing $80,000 in his capacity as 80% owner of the LTC. Barney is treated as borrowing the remaining $20,000 as he holds a 20% interest. On the remission of the loan, both Mr Church and Barney are required to perform a base price adjustment. Before the change in the law, the base price adjustment would have resulted in remission income of $80,000 for Mr Church and $20,000 for Barney. As a result of the law change, no income will arise overall for Mr Church. Barney will continue to have remission income of $20,000. The change in the law means that where an LTC owner forgives an amount that they lent to the LTC no remission income will arise (“self-remission”). A similar change applies to partners who forgive amounts owed by their partnership. Broadly, the concept of self-remission refers to a remission of debt where the creditor is also the debtor by reason of being an owner of a look-through company or a partner. In this case, Mr Church’s “self-remission” is $80,000. This “self-remission” amount is excluded from the “amount remitted” when Mr Church performs his base price adjustment as lender. The base price adjustment is as follows (assuming “income” and “expenditure” is nil): consideration − income + expenditure + amount remitted “Consideration” is −$100,000, being all consideration paid or payable to Mr Church for or under the financial arrangement (nil, because the full amount of the loan is remitted) less all consideration paid and payable by Mr Church for or under the financial arrangement ($100,000, being the full amount of the loan paid to TE Ltd). “Amount remitted” is $20,000, being $100,000 that is not included in the consideration paid or payable to Mr Church because it has been remitted by him, less $80,000 of the amount remitted that is excluded because it is a self-remission. Accordingly, the base price adjustment calculation for Mr Church as lender comes to − $80,000. This amount is treated as interest and is deductible to Mr Church. As LTC owner, the base price adjustment results in income of $80,000 arising to Mr Church being the consideration received (80% of the funds loaned to the LTC). Overall, the remission of the debt results in Mr Church having income of $80,000 and deductible expenditure of $80,000, leaving him in an overall tax neutral position. Barney still has income of $20,000 for his share of the debt remitted. The change in the law applies retrospectively from 1 April 2011.  Taxpayers may also treat arrangements that are excepted financial arrangements under s EW 5(10) as financial arrangements. This applies to persons who have made an interest-free loan in New Zealand currency that is repayable on demand. The ability to treat the loan as a financial arrangement enables a person who loans money to an LTC to get the benefit of the self-remission  amendments when it would ordinarily be unavailable due to the loan being an excepted financial arrangement under s EW 5(10). Credit impairment With effect from 1 April 2017, it has been clarified that in respect of a debt owed by an LTC to a third party, the market value of the debtor’s interest in the debt is adjusted for any credit impairment. This ensures the debt remission rules apply as intended so that debt remission income arises when an LTC is either liquidated or elects out of the LTC rules. This is important given the limiting of the scope of the deduction limitation rules (see ¶19-215), as the debt remission rules are one of the backstops in the Income Tax Act that help to preclude excessive deductions. Inland Revenue has stated that debtors do not need to rely on information from the creditor to determine the amount of credit impairment. Instead, debtors need to make a fair and reasonable estimate of the credit impairment based on the information they have available. To determine the credit impairment, the key question to ask is “if the LTC was sold or liquidated, how much of the debt would be repaid to the creditor?” In most cases, determining this will involve looking at the balance sheet of the LTC to determine the net assets of the LTC. Example 2: Tara sets up a LTC to hold a rental investment property. The LTC gets a mortgage of $500,000 to finance the purchase of the property. The LTC has no insurance for the property. Due to flooding, the rental property declines in value to $300,000. The LTC also has $50,000 in cash reserves. The only liability of the LTC is the mortgage which still has $500,000 outstanding. Tara decides to liquidate the LTC. In determining the market value of the mortgage, Tara must ask “if the LTC was sold or liquidated, how much of the debt would be repaid to the creditor?” Because the LTC has $350,000 in assets and no other liabilities other than the mortgage, the answer to this question is $350,000. When making the base price adjustment, this is the value of the arrangement for the LTC to use.  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 44. Law: IT07 ss CB 32B, EW 8, EW 31(11), HB 4, HZ 8  ¶19-225 Disposal of look-through interests As the underlying principle of transparency that applies to an LTC dictates that the assets of the company are attributed to the owners of that LTC, the owners of an LTC can expect income tax consequences to flow from the disposal of an interest in the company. An owner who sells shares in an LTC is treated as disposing of their share of the LTC assets. There are provisions that provide relief from this general rule. See below. The relationship property rules apply to the disposal of shares under a relationship property agreement. Exceptions to the rules for disposal An exiting owner of an LTC is not required to account for tax on sale proceeds if the difference between the proceeds and the net tax book value of the owner’s interest in the company does not exceed $50,000. An exiting owner of an LTC is not required to perform a revenue account adjustment for a disposal of trading stock if the total annual turnover of the LTC does not exceed $3m. The exiting owner of an LTC is not required to account for depreciation recovery income if the LTC has depreciable property (that is not intangible depreciable property) with a purchase price of not more than $200,000. The exiting owner of an LTC is not required to perform a base price adjustment (see ¶6-358) under the financial arrangements rules where the financial arrangements are necessary and incidental to the business of the LTC, and there is no business of holding financial arrangements.  The exiting owner of an LTC receives excluded income for that part of the purchase price attributable to the disposal of a short-term agreement for sale and purchase. The purchaser of a look-through interest in an LTC may elect to be treated as always being the owner of livestock that is valued under the national standard cost scheme (see ¶27-267) or under the cost price method (see ¶27-268). Deemed disposal A disposal of an owner’s interest in an LTC, at market value, is treated as occurring: ▪ if the LTC becomes an ordinary company ▪ if the LTC ceases to exist, eg on liquidation or by court order ▪ to the extent of a share cancellation by the LTC that is not prorata. The exceptions set out above do not apply to deemed disposals. Law: IT07 ss FB 10B, HB 4–HB 10  ¶19-230 Ceasing to be an LTC If a company fails to meet the requirements to be an LTC or the LTC election is revoked, it will lose its status and cease being an LTC. Dividends paid from retained revenue profit after the company ceases to be an LTC are excluded income and not taxable. These reserves are ascertained as if the company had been put through a notional liquidation at the time it ceased to be an LTC. Dividends are treated as being paid from retained profit until the amount of retained profit has been used up. Once those profits have been depleted, the dividends are no longer excluded income. This is to prevent double taxation, the prospect of which arises because any retained profits held by the company would previously have been held by the owners and taxed at their marginal rate, in their hands, in the income year it was derived.  It is not necessary that the dividends are paid to the same shareholders that held shares in the company when it had LTC status. New shareholders may be paid these non-taxable dividends. The available subscribed capital (ASC) formula (see ¶16-760) is adjusted to reflect capital contributions made while the company was an LTC. Law: IT07 ss CD 43, CX 63  ¶19-235 LTC: Associated persons rule An LTC and an owner are associated if the owner holds 25% or greater interest in the LTC. An LTC and an owner are associated if the owner is a director or employee of the LTC. The aggregation rule applies if ownership interests are held by an associated person. A modified rule applies for the land provisions. The tripartite test has been modified for the LTC regime. Law: IT07 ss YB 13, YB 14  ¶19-240 Tax administration for LTCs An LTC must file an annual tax return using an IR7 form. An LTC income tax return must specify the amount of income derived by the company, and the amount of income and expenditure allocated to each owner. There is no assessment of the company. Each owner makes a separate return of income taking into account the allocation of income and deductions from the LTC. Each owner is assessed separately. An LTC is treated in a similar manner to a qualifying company for the purposes of the disputes resolution regime. Due to the transparent nature of an LTC, owners are treated as taking the LTC’s tax position for the purposes of imposing shortfall penalties. Law: TAA s 42B  CONSOLIDATED COMPANIES & AMALGAMATION OF COMPANIES Consolidated Companies  ¶20-010  Amalgamation of Companies  ¶20-085  CONSOLIDATED COMPANIES ¶20-010 Outline of the consolidated companies regime Two or more companies that are a wholly-owned group of companies may elect to be treated as a consolidated group of companies. Where such election is made, those companies will be taxed as if they were a single company. The regime is an elective one, with the term “consolidated group”, defined in s YA 1, as being a consolidated group formed under s FM 35. Under the consolidation regime, wholly-owned groups of companies are able to: ▪ transfer assets within the consolidated group, with deferred income tax consequences ▪ pay exempt dividends between the companies (including exemption from FBT on non-cash dividends) ▪ claim deductions for administration and other costs of holding companies that may not normally be deductible to the holding company (this would be the case if the holding company derives no income)  ▪ utilise losses incurred by group members by referring to shareholder continuity of the group, not of the individual members, and ▪ offset imputation credits within the group, even though ordinary imputation credit rules do not permit grouping of imputation credits. Other important aspects of the regime include the following: ▪ A consolidated group is issued with its own IRD number. One consolidated income tax return is prepared to cover total income and losses of each member less intra-group transactions of all members of the group. ▪ The member companies must nominate one of their number to be agent for tax purposes. Each member company must expressly agree to be jointly and severally responsible for income tax, PAYE, RWT, employer’s superannuation contribution tax and FBT liabilities. However, each individual company remains legally responsible for compliance with the relevant provisions. ▪ All intra-group interest and dividend flows remain exempt from RWT. ▪ Joint tax assessments are only available to consolidated groups. ▪ Provisional tax is payable on a group basis with thresholds applying to group income and group residual income tax. ▪ Losses incurred by group members are available for use by any group member, including a new group member. This is because shareholder continuity is determined by reference to the group, not the individual member generating the loss. Losses incurred by a company while a member of the group remain with the group on that company’s exit from the group.  ▪ The regime extends to controlled foreign companies and foreign investment funds. Potential disadvantages Potential disadvantages of the consolidation regime include: ▪ joint and several liability for consolidated group company tax liabilities continuing after the disposal of a company out of the group (subject to limited exceptions) ▪ underlying income tax liabilities when a company ceases to be a member of a consolidated group while holding property that has been the subject of intra-group transfers — thus the group will be required to continually monitor asset transfers out of the group to make sure the necessary tax adjustments are made ▪ exposure to normal tax rules for transactions occurring during the year a company ceases to be a member of a consolidated group, and ▪ possible increased compliance costs and onerous administrative and accounting requirements including: □ tracing of pre-consolidation losses and imputation credits □ keeping records for intra-group transfers of assets □ preparation of tax accounts for individual group companies, and □ elimination of intra-group transactions. Law: IT07 subpart FM  ¶20-015 Eligibility to form a consolidated group Two or more companies may form a consolidated group of companies if at the time the companies are a wholly-owned group of  companies and eligible to be part of a consolidated group under ss FM 31 and FM 35. The eligibility rules are contained in s FM 31. Only companies resident in New Zealand may consolidate. To be eligible to form a consolidated group or to remain as part of a consolidated group at a particular time, the consolidating companies must be 100% commonly owned, and each group company must satisfy the following requirements: ▪ it must be resident in New Zealand ▪ it must not be a foreign company ▪ it must not derive only exempt income (other than foreign company dividends and dividends from within wholly-owned group of companies) ▪ the company must be incorporated in New Zealand, or be carrying on business through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, and ▪ the company must not be liable to income tax in another country or territory by reason of domicile, residence or place of incorporation. These latter two requirements do not apply to determine whether a grandparented consolidated company is eligible to form or join a consolidated group, or continues as part of a consolidated group. A grandparented consolidated company is a company that chose to form or join the consolidated group before 17 May 2006, carries on a business, and whose total amount of finance-related deductions (ie interest incurred or expenditure under the financial arrangements rules, other than amounts arising only from movements in currency exchange rates) for the previous income year is within specified thresholds. See s FM 31(3). If two or more companies wish to form a consolidated group for income tax purposes, they must satisfy the requirements of s FM 35  for consolidation: ▪ the companies are a wholly-owned group of companies (s IC 4 describes the way in which 100% common ownership is determined), and ▪ the companies are eligible under s FM 31(1) and: □ the companies have the same balance date (s FM 31(4)) □ the companies are either all qualifying companies or all nonqualifying companies, ie a qualifying company cannot consolidate with a non-qualifying company (s FM 31(2)(a)) □ no shares in the companies have been subject to an arrangement to defeat the intention and application of the consolidation rules (s FM 31(6)). Consolidation of mining companies Special rules apply to the consolidation of mining operations to ensure that: ▪ a mineral miner that is a company may form a consolidated group only with other mineral miners companies (see s FM 31(2)), and ▪ losses incurred by mineral miners are dealt with under subpart IS (Mineral miners’ and petroleum miners’ tax losses) rather than subpart ID (Use of tax losses by consolidated groups) (see s IS 2). Law: IT07 ss FM 31, FM 35(1), IS 1(2)  ¶20-020 Forming a consolidated group Companies seeking consolidation that have satisfied the requirements of s FM 31 follow the procedure for forming a consolidated group set out in s FM 35.  For two companies to form a new consolidated group, an election must be made in writing to the Commissioner nominating one of the companies to be the agent of the consolidated group for the purposes of the Act. Elections can be completed on form IR 494. The election notice must contain: ▪ an agreement by each of the companies to be jointly and severally liable with other members of the consolidated group for any income tax payable by the consolidated group, and ▪ a nomination of an agent or “nominated company” of the group. The nominated company becomes the first point of contact with IR, and is the company to which, in the first instance, IR looks to satisfy any unpaid tax liabilities. The nominated company can transfer its status to another consolidated group company by notifying the Commissioner. Electing companies are generally treated as forming a consolidated group with effect from the beginning of the income year in which it notifies IR, provided it gives this notice within 63 working days of the start of that income year. If an election is received later or the notice does not specify an income year, it applies from the start of the following income year. See s FM 38(4). Under s FM 38(5) there is provision for companies that have become entitled to form a consolidated group during an income year to be treated as a consolidated group from the first day of entitlement provided that the notice is received by the Commissioner within 63 working days of the first day of entitlement. Companies that form a consolidated group during an income year are required to provide part-year accounts in the return for that year. An anti-avoidance provision is contained in s FM 38(7), which prevents groups consolidating during an income year where it is reasonable to conclude there is an arrangement to defeat the intent and application of the consolidation rules. It is not possible for a company to be a member of more than one consolidated group at any particular time. See s FM 32.  Law: IT07 ss FM 32, FM 34, FM 35, FM 38, HD 11(1)  ¶20-025 Joining an existing consolidated group If a consolidated group exists, another company that meets the eligibility requirements and is entitled to become a member of the same consolidated group may elect to join that group by notice in writing to the Commissioner (usually on form IR 495). The rules for joining an existing consolidated group are similar to those for forming a consolidated group. The notice must contain the company’s agreement to be jointly and severally liable for any income tax payable by the consolidated group. A company that joins an existing consolidated group is usually treated as a member with effect from the beginning of the income year in which it notifies IR, provided it gives notice within 63 days of the start of the income year. In any other case, membership will commence from the start of the following year. A recently acquired company may join an existing consolidated group from the day it first becomes entitled to be a member, providing that it notifies IR within 63 working days of entitlement. Similarly, a newly incorporated company may also join an existing consolidated group from the start of the income year in which it is incorporated providing it notifies IR within 63 working days of incorporation. See s FM 38(6). Law: IT07 ss FM 36, FM 38  ¶20-030 Leaving a consolidated group A company may voluntarily cease to be a member of a consolidated group by notifying the Commissioner. A company may defer the date on which it leaves the consolidated group to the first day of the next income year. If the company does not defer the leaving date, it is treated as ceasing membership with effect from the start of the income year in which the Commissioner receives the notice. If a company leaves a consolidated group in the same income year it  joined the group and does not defer the leaving date, it is treated as ceasing membership on the date it joined the group. See s FM 39. The following provisions provide for circumstances in which a company is deemed to have ceased being a member of a consolidated group: ▪ The company no longer meets the eligibility criteria in s FM 31. See ss FM 37(b) and FM 40. ▪ The company is no longer eligible to be in the same consolidated group as the nominated company. See ss FM 37(c) and FM 40. ▪ The company is a member of a consolidated group that ceases to have a nominated company. See ss FM 37(d) and FM 41. Section FM 40 covers the position where a company is no longer eligible to be part of a consolidated group or is no longer eligible to be in the same group as the nominated company. In such cases, the company will be treated as leaving the consolidated group from the beginning of the income year in which the relevant event affecting eligibility occurred. Alternatively, a company may leave the consolidated group from the date eligibility ended, provided notice is given to the Commissioner within 20 working days of that date and the company provides part-year financial statements. Note that the Commissioner can extend the notice period if it is reasonable to do so in the circumstances. An anti-avoidance provision in s FM 40(5) provides the notice will not be valid if it was part of an arrangement to defeat the consolidation rules. In that case, the company will be treated as leaving the group at the beginning of the tax year in which its eligibility ended. If a company’s eligibility ends in the same income year in which it joined the group, the company is treated as leaving the consolidated group on the day it joined. Where, during an income year, the consolidated group ceases to have a nominated company, all the companies in the group are treated as having left the group from the beginning of that income year. However, in the situation where the nominated company is liquidated and IR receives written notice of a replacement nominated  company within 20 working days after the date of liquidation, then the other companies are not treated as having left the group. The Commissioner has discretion to extend the notice period. See s FM 34(5). Note that if a company is no longer part of a consolidated group because it has been liquidated, the company is not treated as leaving the group from the start of the income year of liquidation and part-year financial statements are not required. See s FM 42. Law: IT07 ss FM 37, FM 39, FM 40, FM 41, FM 42  ¶20-032 When part-year financial statements required under consolidation regime When a company enters or exits a consolidated group, or a consolidated group forms or ends, during an income year, the company or consolidated group (as appropriate) must furnish partyear financial statements in the tax return for that year. See s FM 14. Part-year accounts are necessary because the company or consolidated group becomes a different tax entity and will be subject to different tax rules in the year of formation, entry, exit or cessation. Part-year financial statements must be included in the company’s, or consolidated group’s, tax return and filed by the normal due date. The annual gross income, annual total deductions, income tax liability or tax loss is determined by treating the part year as a complete year. Because the part year is treated as a complete income year, the income/loss of the separate part-year periods are not netted off. This is relevant when determining any part-year net losses and profits for carry forward and offset in subsequent income years. Law: IT07 s FM 14  ¶20-035 Returns, assessments and liability under consolidation regime  Where a company is a member of a consolidated group, the nominated company is liable to make a single return of income derived in that income year by all the companies. The other companies do not make separate returns of income, except where any company is not a member of the group for part of the income year. The return is filed under an IRD number that is separate from the individual companies’ IRD numbers; however, it must include accounts for the separate affairs of each company. The consolidated group will receive only one income tax notice of assessment that will cover the group as a whole. Separate notices of assessment will only be issued where they are required by part-year consolidations. Each company in the consolidated group will be jointly and severally liable for any taxable income arising in the period when that company is a member of the group. This liability replaces any individual liability those companies may have had for the income tax on income derived by them. However, note that the nominated company may apply to the Commissioner for approval for one or more named companies in the consolidated group to bear the group’s income tax liability for the tax year. The Commissioner must approve any such application, unless limiting the liability to the named companies will significantly prejudice the likely recovery of the group’s tax for the year. Where approval is granted, the named companies are jointly and severally liable for the group’s tax. See s FM 4. When a company leaves a consolidated group, s FM 5 is intended to ensure that the joint and several liability imposed on all members of a consolidated group to satisfy income tax obligations of the consolidated group does not apply to that company in relation to an increase in an income tax obligation of the group made: ▪ for a tax year the exiting company was a member of the group, and ▪ under an amended assessment for that tax year after the exiting company left the group.  Law: IT07 ss FM 3, FM 4, FM 5  ¶20-040 Calculation of taxable income of consolidated group Detailed rules for calculating the taxable income or net loss of a consolidated group are contained in ss FM 7–FM 23. These rules provide that a consolidated group is, generally, to be treated as if it were a single company and intra-group transactions are excluded from the calculations of income, although asset transfers result in deferred income tax liabilities. A consolidated group’s taxable income is the sum of all the member companies’ taxable income with some special rules applying to: ▪ treatment of the consolidated group as a single company ▪ the determination of thresholds on a group level ▪ intra-group items of income and expenditure. Generally, intra-group transactions are treated as transactions between branches of the same company. Under s CX 60 when a company that is part of a consolidated group derives an amount from a transaction with another group company, the amount derived is excluded income of the company. However, under s FM 8, amounts arising from the following transactions will be included in taxable income: ▪ the disposal of trading stock ▪ certain amounts under a base price adjustment (see s EW 31) ▪ dividends arising from pre-consolidation debt remissions ▪ from 1 April 2019 for the 2019–20 and later income years (unless an applicable binding ruling was made before 6 April 2017), dividends derived by a local authority from a council controlled organisation, port company or energy company.  Section FM 9 applies when a company that is part of a consolidated group derives an amount that would not be income of the company in the absence of the section but would be income of the consolidated group if it were one company. The section provides that the amount is income of the company under s CV 2 (Consolidated groups: income of company in group). An exception to this exists in relation to the land tainting rules for bodies linked or associated with a local authority (see s CB 15C and ¶7-209) and companies in the same wholly owned group as Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) (see s CB 15D and ¶7-210). Income tax consequences of intra-group asset and property transfers are deferred until: ▪ the group deconsolidates ▪ a transferee leaves or ceases to be a member of the group (other than being liquidated), or ▪ a transferred asset is disposed of outside the group. Essentially, assets are transferred intra-group at the tax written down value. In the event of a company leaving the group or the group deconsolidating, the tax profit or loss will be based on the deemed market value of the asset at the time the company leaves the group, the cost of the asset to the original transferor, and accumulated depreciation. A complex and comprehensive set of asset transfer rules apply to determine deferred tax liabilities on assets subsequently transferred out of the group. Expenditure/loss incurred by group companies In general, expenditure or losses incurred through transactions with other consolidated group companies are not deductible. Expenditure incurred on transactions with non-group members are deductible. See ss DV 16 and FM 10. Deductions for administration and other expenses of a holding company are allowed regardless of whether the holding company itself derives any assessable income. See s FM 11.  If a consolidated group would be denied a deduction for an item of expenditure or loss as one company, a company that is part of the consolidated group is denied a deduction. The exception is for an amount of expenditure or loss that relates to interest on money borrowed by the company from an external party so that another group member could acquire a minimum 66% shareholding of a third group company. It will be necessary to demonstrate a clear link between the monies borrowed and the intra-group loan used to purchase equity (in the third group company) to satisfy the requirements of s DB 7. See ss DV 17 and FM 12. Threshold levels In accordance with rules set out in s FM 2, where a provision of the Income Tax Act 2007 specifies a threshold, the position of the group is required to be determined as if the consolidated group is a single company. Law: IT07 ss CX 60, FM 6(1), FM 7–FM 23  ¶20-045 Loss carry-forward and grouping of consolidated group members All losses incurred by members of a consolidated group are treated as losses of the group. This means that the losses remain with the group for utilisation against group results when the company incurring them leaves the group. A consolidated group is treated as if it were a single company for the purposes of the carry-forward, carry-back and grouping of tax losses. Consequently, the results of a consolidated group can be grouped with other companies outside the consolidated group. The ownership of a member company’s pre-consolidation losses remains with that member. During the time that company is a member of the group, the member’s pre-consolidation losses can be offset against group taxable income. This is the case provided the company meets the loss carry-forward rules in subpart IA, and the group existed from the year the loss was incurred through to the income year of the offset. Where the company claiming the loss  does not have the required minimum 66% common ownership interests under s IC 3 with one or more companies in the same consolidated group, s ID 3 restricts the loss to the total of: ▪ the amounts that the company incurring the pre-consolidation loss (loss company) is permitted to carry forward if it was not part of the consolidated group, and ▪ the amount permitted to be offset against income of those other members that formed a 66% group with the loss company at all relevant times. A member’s pre-consolidation losses that are not offset against group income can be: ▪ carried forward for offset against the company’s future income when it leaves the group, or ▪ offset to a commonly owned company (66%) with it, which may include a company in another consolidated group, or ▪ offset by way of election or payment from a profit company against assessable income of a company that is not a member of a consolidated group. The ordering rules in s IA 9 provide that consolidated group losses and pre-consolidation losses are carried forward for offset in the same order as they were incurred, ie on a “first in, first out” basis. Where these losses arise in the same tax year the consolidated group must determine the order in which the losses are to be used and notify IR accordingly. If notification is not provided the losses must be used on a pro rata basis. Law: IT07 ss IA 9(3), ID 1–ID 5  ¶20-050 Consolidated groups and the CFC and FIF regimes  Under s FM 6(4), for the purposes of the controlled foreign company (CFC) and foreign investment fund (FIF) regimes, a consolidated group is treated as if it were a single company. In the case of an individual group member having pre-consolidation tax credits, attributed CFC losses or FIF losses, ownership of those credits and net losses remains with that group member. A member’s pre-consolidation tax credits, attributed CFC losses or FIF losses may be used as follows: ▪ offset against the group’s income tax ▪ offset against the group’s attributed CFC income or FIF income, subject to the quarantine rules ▪ carried forward for offset against future income tax payable ▪ carried forward for offset against the member’s further net income when it leaves the consolidated group or joins another group ▪ offset against income tax payable by any other commonly owned company. As with other losses, the group’s tax credits, attributed CFC losses and FIF losses must be used on a “first in, first out” basis. Where losses arise in the same tax year the consolidated group must pro rata the losses. Law: IT07 ss FM 6(4), IQ 1(3), IQ 6–IQ 8, LK 8–LK 11  ¶20-065 Provisional tax obligations of a consolidated group A consolidated group, for provisional tax purposes, is regarded as a single company. Consequently, the provisional tax thresholds apply on a group basis. The initial liability is with the nominated company. However, each company that is a member of the consolidated group is jointly and severally liable for any provisional tax payable by the  group. Where a group has been granted approval by IR for joint and several liability to be limited under s FM 4 to one or more of its companies, the provisional tax liability is also modified. See ss FM 4(3)–(5) and RC 28(3). Company joining or leaving a consolidated group Provision is made for the situation where a company joins or leaves a consolidated group under ss RC 29 and RC 30. Where a company joins a consolidated group, under s RC 29(2) the residual income tax of the consolidated group is treated as increased by an amount equal to the residual income tax of the individual company for the preceding tax year, or the tax year before that, as applicable. Example: Kalo Ltd joins Black consolidated group on 1 April 20X4. The group has a 31 March balance date. Kalo Ltd was a member for 12 months during the 20X5 income year. Black group must include 12 months of residual income tax derived by Kalo Ltd in the 20X4 income year (plus 5% uplift) (or the 20X3 income year (plus 10% uplift)) in its provisional tax payments for the 20X5 provisional tax year. Kalo Ltd makes no payment of provisional tax individually.  Where an individual company ceases to be a member for all or part of a tax year, it must estimate its residual income tax no later than the third instalment date for the income year following the year of departure. See ss RC 7 and RC 30. The consolidated group may file an estimate reducing its provisional tax payment. GST ratio method A consolidated group can elect to use the GST ratio method to determine the provisional tax liability for a tax year if the group meets the requirements set out in s RC 16 and is not excluded by s RC 17. See ¶22-105. Section RC 31 sets out specific modifications to the GST ratio method provisions when a company joins a consolidated group to provide for situations such as where the group loses its eligibility to use that method or the ratio must be recalculated. Law: IT07 ss FM 4, RC 8, RC 16, RC 17, RC 28–RC 31  ¶20-068 Withholding tax obligations of a consolidated group Joint and several liability for a consolidated group’s income tax extends to resident withholding tax, fringe benefit tax, employer’s superannuation contribution tax and tax deductions including PAYE. However, member companies remain individually responsible for complying with their respective obligations for these taxes, such as filing individual returns. Law: IT07 s FM 3(7)  ¶20-070 Imputation account of a consolidated group Subpart OP of the Income Tax Act 2007 contains the provisions dealing with the operation of the imputation credit account of consolidated groups. A consolidated group is required to maintain a group imputation credit account (ICA) covering the group’s activities. The ICA balance of an individual company that becomes a member of the consolidated group is not transferred to the group ICA on entry. The ICA of each member in the group is maintained separately from the group ICA. A transfer from an individual company ICA occurs when the group ICA is in debit and that debit is not offset by any group credit that arose earlier or on the same date as the credit in the individual company ICA. When a credit transfer occurs, a corresponding debit arises to the individual ICA. The ordering procedure for group credits is set out in s OP 22(3). The ordering procedure ensures that if a company leaves the consolidated group, it takes its unused preconsolidation imputation credits with it. The nominated company for a consolidated group must fulfil the group’s requirements under ss 69 and 70 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 regarding annual imputation returns as if the group were a single company. See s 74 of the Tax Administration Act.  ▸Note: Use of pre-consolidation imputation credits The Commissioner’s view and practice is that the current s OP 22 has always required a consolidated imputation group to exhaust all its group imputation credits before it can draw on the preconsolidation credits of the individual group companies. However, this view has been contested by stakeholders from the private sector who have argued, in particular, that the general legislative framework for individual companies requires imputation credits to be used on a FIFO basis. As a result, an amendment has been proposed in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020. Under the proposed amendment, a consolidated imputation group will be able to use pre-consolidation imputation credit balances in a group company’s ICA before it uses group credits. This means that imputation credits generally will be used on a FIFO basis, which is in line with the wider imputation framework. To be used by the consolidated imputation group, the preconsolidation imputation credit balance of the group company must exist at the date of the debit to the group ICA (so shareholder continuity must be satisfied for the amount to be transferred). The amount of the credit balance that can be transferred from group companies to the group will be limited to the amount of the group’s imputation debit. This is because, when an imputation credit is transferred from a group company’s ICA to the consolidated imputation group’s ICA, the date for the credit becomes the day of the credit transfer, rather than the day the tax was paid. Consequently, if the credit transfer were not limited to the consolidated imputation group’s debit, credits could be carried forward that would (and should) otherwise have been extinguished due to changes in shareholder continuity calculated by reference to the date the credit originally arose. It is intended that the proposed amendment will apply retrospectively for the 2008–09 and later income years.  Law: IT07 subpart OP, s GB 38; TAA s 74  AMALGAMATION OF COMPANIES ¶20-085 Outline of amalgamations Amalgamations are authorised by Pt 13 of the Companies Act 1993. Under s 219 of the Companies Act, two or more companies may amalgamate and continue as one company, which may be one of the amalgamating companies or it may be a new company. Two approaches are available to achieve that outcome. Forms of amalgamation The first approach involves the participation of shareholders. It requires the preparation of a formal amalgamation proposal incorporating details of the intended transaction. The boards of the amalgamating companies must resolve that the amalgamation is in the best interests of both companies and that the solvency test will be satisfied immediately after the amalgamation becomes effective. In addition, shareholders must approve the amalgamation by a special resolution (75% approval required). The second approach is a short-form amalgamation between companies that are, directly or indirectly, wholly-owned. The amalgamation proposal must be approved by the boards of the amalgamating companies with notice of the proposal to secured creditors. Again the boards need to resolve that the solvency test will be satisfied immediately after the amalgamation becomes effective. Shareholder approval is not required. Once approved, the amalgamation proposal must be notified to the Registrar of Companies. Upon receipt of the notification and the supporting documents the Registrar issues a certificate of amalgamation with the certificate specifying the effective date of the amalgamation. On the effective date, the amalgamated company has its name registered (if it is newly incorporated), and all of the amalgamating  companies other than the surviving company are removed from the register of companies. Where there are cross-shareholdings in amalgamating companies, these shares are cancelled for no payment or consideration. The general tenor of the effect of the amalgamation is that the amalgamated company succeeds to all the assets, property, rights, powers and privileges, together with all of the liabilities and obligations, of the amalgamating company. Example: Company A is owned 50% by Apple Trust and 50% by Mr Jae. Company B is owned 50% by Mr Apple and 50% by Mr Jae.  Can Company A and Company B amalgamate? If they cannot amalgamate, would a share transfer of 50% in Company B from Mr Apple to Apple Trust assist with the objective of amalgamating Company A and Company B? As matters stand, Company A and Company B are unrelated and a long form amalgamation would be necessary, with a share issue or a cash payment from the amalgamated company on amalgamation to either the trustees of Apple Trust, if Company A is to be the amalgamated company, or to Mr Apple personally, if Company B is to be the amalgamated company. This would compensate them for their lost investment when Company A or Company B is removed. For a short form amalgamation under s 222(2) of the Companies Act, Mr Apple would have to transfer his shares in Company B to the trustees of Apple Trust, so the  holding in both Company A and Company B would be Mr Jae 50% and the trustees 50%. Either company could then become the amalgamated company. A s 222(1) short form amalgamation is possible, but would entail the transfer of the full shareholding in either Company A or Company B to the other company, ie Company A would become a subsidiary of Company B or vice versa. The determining factor would be who would be the ultimate shareholders. For example, will the ultimate shareholders be those currently holding in Company A with a shareholder Company A/Company B structure or those shareholders currently holding in Company B with a shareholder Company B/Company A structure?  Adjusting the shareholding to create a suitable structure for a short form amalgamation involves share transfers for consideration on a shareholder-to-shareholder level, which is a personal expense to the purchasing shareholder. If the long form procedure is used the share transfers are avoided, with the amalgamated company instead providing compensation to the holders whose investment is lost when the company in which they hold shares is removed. Long form amalgamation Although it involves more work, the long form procedure may be preferable in this case. At least 20 working days before the proposed date of amalgamation the board of each company must send to each shareholder: ▪ a copy of the amalgamation proposal ▪ copies of the certificates given by directors that the amalgamation is in the best interests of the company and that the amalgamated company will satisfy the solvency test ▪ a summary of the principal provisions of the constitution of the amalgamated company (if it has one) ▪ a statement that a copy of the amalgamated company’s constitution will be supplied to any shareholder who requests it ▪ a statement setting out the buyout rights conferred by s 110 of the Companies Act  ▪ a statement of any material interests of the directors in the proposal, whether in the capacity of directors or otherwise, and ▪ any further information and explanation necessary to enable a shareholder to understand the nature and consequence to the company and its shareholders of the proposal. The board must also send a copy of the proposal to every secured creditor and give public notice of the proposal in accordance with s 221(4) of the Companies Act. The board must consider if the amalgamation will be in the best interests of the company. Best interest is assumed to be present in a short form amalgamation, because the amalgamation simply shrinks a group of companies, whereas a long form amalgamation is generally for unrelated companies and needs to be justified. The amalgamation proposal must be approved by the shareholders of each amalgamating company and, if necessary, by any relevant interest group: see s 221(5) of the Companies Act. Law: C93 ss 219, 225  ¶20-090 Tax consequences of amalgamations Tax provisions in subpart FO specify the taxation consequences of the amalgamation of companies. In general, these sections provide that for resident’s restricted amalgamations (previously “qualifying amalgamations”) certain property may be transferred to an amalgamated company on a concessional taxation basis and an amalgamated company may succeed to tax losses and imputation credits as well as other credits of amalgamating companies subject to the tests of continuity and commonality of ownership being satisfied. The general law position is that the amalgamated company succeeds to all of the property, rights, powers and privileges of the amalgamating company. This treatment is expressly extended for  income tax purposes for the year of amalgamation and earlier tax years. Under s FO 4, for those periods, the amalgamated company: ▪ must comply with the obligations of the amalgamating company under the Inland Revenue Acts ▪ must meet the liabilities of the amalgamating company under the Inland Revenue Acts, and ▪ is entitled to the rights, powers and privileges of the amalgamating company under the Inland Revenue Acts. Similar provisions are set out in s 76 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Some overlap may be created by that provision stating that the amalgamated company must: ▪ comply with all obligations of and meet all liabilities of, and be entitled to all rights, powers and privileges of, the amalgamating company under the Inland Revenue Acts with respect to the tax year in which the amalgamation occurs and all preceding tax years, and ▪ make a return of income for the amalgamating company for the tax year in which the amalgamation occurs. One consequence of this treatment is that the amalgamated company becomes responsible for payment of any tax owed by the amalgamating company. For example, the amalgamating company may have an income tax liability on account of the disposal of property of the amalgamating company at market value under an amalgamation that is not a resident’s restricted amalgamation. The amalgamated company becomes responsible for satisfying this tax liability. No remission income General principles include the proposition that income may arise if an amount allowed as a deduction is subsequently remitted. As a companion measure the deduction is restored if the remitted liability is subsequently paid.  Neither of these rules apply merely because the amalgamated company succeeds to a liability of the amalgamating company upon the amalgamation. See s FO 5. An amount remitted may arise for base price adjustment calculation purposes if the amalgamating company is insolvent. Binding rulings The Commissioner considers that an amalgamated company is entitled to rely on a private, product or status ruling that an amalgamating company was previously entitled to rely on. This is because the amalgamated company succeeds to all of the rights, powers and privileges of the amalgamating company. However, the ability to rely on the pre-amalgamation ruling is subject to the continued fulfilment of any conditions and assumptions and postamalgamation dealings not being materially different to the arrangement ruled upon. See the interpretation statement “The impact of company amalgamations on binding rulings” in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 6, August 2005 at 12. Financial arrangements determinations IR has also stated that the rights or obligations arising to an amalgamating taxpayer under a financial arrangements determination (being a taxpayer-specific determination made under s 90AC on application by the taxpayer under s 90AB(1) of the Tax Administration Act) will pass to the amalgamated company on the amalgamation. This will be the case whether the amalgamation is a resident’s restricted amalgamation or an amalgamation other than a resident’s restricted amalgamation. See “Questions we’ve been asked” item, “The impact of company amalgamations on financial arrangement determinations”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 1, February 2006 at 22. Law: IT07 subpart FO; TAA s 76  ¶20-093 Notification to the Commissioner of amalgamation  Details of the amalgamation transaction must be notified to the Commissioner. The information to be supplied encompasses: ▪ the name and tax file number of each amalgamating company and the amalgamated company ▪ the date upon which the amalgamation has effect ▪ the balance date of the amalgamated company if it is a nonstandard balance date, and ▪ any other information that may be required. The information is to be incorporated in form IR 432. Form IR 432 must be filed with the Commissioner within 63 working days of one of the following: ▪ the date of delivery of the documents evidencing the amalgamation to the Registrar of Companies for registration ▪ the date the notice of transfer of all engagements is registered in the case of an amalgamation of building societies ▪ the date of the extraordinary resolution in the case of an amalgamation of co-operative dairy companies, or ▪ the date the equivalent procedure occurs under foreign law in the case of an amalgamation under foreign law. A copy of the certificate of amalgamation needs to be filed together with completed form IR 432. Law: TAA s 75  ¶20-095 Resident’s restricted amalgamation A resident’s restricted amalgamation occurs where, at the time of the amalgamation, each of the amalgamating companies and the amalgamated company:  ▪ is a New Zealand resident (see s FO 3(1)(a)) ▪ is not treated as a non-resident under a double taxation agreement (see s FO 3(1)(b)) ▪ does not derive only exempt income, excluding dividends exempt under ss CW 9 and CW 10 (a company here includes a local authority that is not a council-controlled organisation) (see s FO 3(1)(c) and (4)) ▪ are qualifying companies if the amalgamated company is, immediately after the amalgamation, a qualifying company (QC) (see s FO 3(1)(d) and (2)), and ▪ have not elected out of the resident’s restricted amalgamation regime (see s FO 3(5)). The QC regime changed for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2011. Existing QCs and LAQCs may continue to use the QC rules (but without the ability to attribute losses), but companies that were not already QCs are no longer able to enter the QC regime. See further at ¶19-010. With respect to a resident’s restricted amalgamation, existing QCs may still amalgamate in accordance with the provisions set out in s FO 3(2). It is possible to amalgamate a QC with a non-QC. However, the amalgamation will not be a resident’s restricted amalgamation. Consequently, the concessional tax rules that apply to a resident’s restricted amalgamation will not apply. To elect out of treatment as a resident’s restricted amalgamation, the election must be included with the notice of amalgamation to be filed with IR no later than 63 days after registration of the amalgamation with the Companies Office. Law: IT07 s FO 3; TAA s 75  ¶20-100 Available subscribed capital and available capital distribution amount of amalgamated companies  The available subscribed capital and the available capital distribution amount of a company are the amounts that can be distributed taxfree to shareholders who hold the shares on capital account. See ¶16-720 and ¶16-760. Both amounts are valuable to companies and particular care is required to make sure they are calculated accurately. Section CD 43 contains the rules for calculating the available subscribed capital (ASC) of a company. This section, including the effects of an amalgamation on the calculation of ASC, is discussed in full at ¶16-760. In brief, the ASC of the amalgamated company is preserved and includes the ASC of amalgamating companies: s CD 43(15). Where shares in an amalgamated company held by an amalgamating company are cancelled on amalgamation, the available subscribed capital of the amalgamated company is reduced: s CD 43(24) and (25). When determining the available capital distribution amount of an amalgamated company, s CD 44(8) ensures that a capital gain amount of an amalgamating company retains its character as a capital gain amount when it passes to the amalgamated company on amalgamation. Law: IT07 ss CD 43(15), (24), (25), CD 44(8)  ¶20-101 No taxable dividend when amalgamating company ceases to exist An amount derived by an amalgamated company on a resident’s restricted amalgamation from an amalgamating company that ceases to exist is not a dividend if it arises from: ▪ the amalgamated company acquiring property of the amalgamating company, or ▪ the amalgamated company being relieved of an obligation owed to the amalgamating company.  Law: IT07 s CD 35  ¶20-105 Cancellation of shares in an amalgamation Where an amalgamating company holds shares in another amalgamating company that are cancelled upon amalgamation, the shares are deemed to have been disposed of by the shareholder amalgamating company immediately before the amalgamation for an amount equal to the cost of the shares to the shareholder amalgamating company. This treatment ensures that no taxable income emerges from the cancellation. Where shares in an amalgamating company are held by someone other than another amalgamating company and those shares are transferred or cancelled as a consequence of the amalgamation, the general provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007 apply. This means that revenue account shareholders will realise income or losses as a result of the amalgamation. Law: IT07 s FO 6  ¶20-106 Resident’s restricted amalgamation: transfer of depreciable assets “Amortising property” is transferred on a resident’s restricted amalgamation at a tax written-down value, ie cost less depreciation. “Amortising property” is property for which a depreciation deduction is allowed or for which a deduction on account of amortisation of expenditure may be made (see s YA 1 definition). The amalgamated company is deemed to have acquired the property on the date on which it was acquired by the amalgamating company for an amount that is the sum of: ▪ the price paid for the property, and ▪ any expenditure incurred in buying or improving the property, and  ▪ any expenditure incurred in securing or improving the amalgamating company’s legal rights to the property. The amalgamated company is also treated as having claimed all the depreciation in connection with that asset. The amalgamating company is deemed not to have derived any income or have had any deductions on the disposal of the asset to the amalgamated company. Consequently, no clawback of depreciation will arise on the transfer of depreciable property on a resident’s restricted amalgamation. See s FO 16(1), (1B) and (4). Where the property transferred was subject to the pool method of depreciation, the consideration for the disposal and acquisition depends on whether the property comprises the entire pool or only part of the pool. In the case of the former, the consideration is the adjusted tax value of the pool immediately before the amalgamation. In the latter case, the consideration is the lesser of the market value of the property or the adjusted tax value of the pool immediately before the amalgamation. See s FO 16(2) and (3). An amalgamating company transferring property to the amalgamated company in a resident’s restricted amalgamation may claim depreciation in the year of amalgamation for the period up to the date of amalgamation. See ss DV 15(3) and FO 10(7). Law: IT07 ss DV 15(3), FO 10, FO 16, YA 1  ¶20-107 Resident’s restricted amalgamation: acquisition of trading stock Where property transferred on a resident’s restricted amalgamation is trading stock of both the amalgamating and amalgamated companies, the consideration for the disposal and acquisition is taken as the value of the trading stock to the amalgamating company as determined under the valuation methods provided for in subpart EB. Valuation of the trading stock will be at the time of the amalgamation. See s FO 10(5).  For further background on the available valuation methods, see ¶9020–¶9-063. Law: IT07 s FO 10(5)  ¶20-108 Resident’s restricted amalgamation: acquisition of revenue account property and land Under s FO 10(6), if property is revenue account property of the amalgamating company but not of the amalgamated company, the consideration for the disposal and acquisition is taken as the market value of the property at the time of the amalgamation. The land will not be held to be revenue account property simply because of the operation of the “bright-line test” in s CB 6A or the “10-year rule” in ss CB 9–CB 11 and CB 14. However, s FO 17(3) may apply. Land held on capital account by the amalgamating company but on revenue account by the amalgamated company because of the bright-line test or 10-year rule is also deemed to be transferred to the amalgamated company at market value at the time of amalgamation. The transfer of land that is subject to the bright-line test or 10-year rule will not trigger assessability, rather the relevant bright-line or 10year period will apply from the date of acquisition by the original amalgamating company. Under s FO 17(3) if the amalgamated company subsequently disposes of the property within the relevant bright-line or 10-year period from the date of acquisition of the amalgamating company, any profit or gain from the disposal is income of the amalgamated company. When, at the time of the amalgamation, it is unclear whether the amalgamated company holds the property on revenue or capital account (eg the amalgamated company would only hold the property on revenue account if it disposed of it within 10 years), the property is transferred at market value when: ▪ the land is held on revenue account by the amalgamating company (but not merely because of the bright-line test or 10year rule), and  ▪ the land is, or may be, revenue account property of the amalgamated company because of the bright-line test or 10year rule. Whether property is transferred at cost (no tax liability) or market value (tax liability) can be summarised in the following table. Amalgamated company Holds on capital account  Holds on Holds on revenue revenue account account (except if solely due solely due to brightto brightline test line test or 10-year or 10-year rule rule)  Holds on capital account  Cost  Market  Market  Holds on revenue account (except if solely due to brightline test Amalgamating or 10-year rule) company  Market  Cost  Market  Holds on revenue account solely due to brightline test  Cost  Cost  Cost  or 10-year rule Table adapted from “Bright-line test for residential land”, Special Report from Policy and Strategy, Inland Revenue, November 2015. Law: IT07 ss FO 10(6), FO 17  ¶20-109 Resident’s restricted amalgamation: transfer of financial arrangements Where a financial arrangement is transferred from an amalgamating company to the amalgamated company on a resident’s restricted amalgamation, the special provisions under s FO 12 will apply if the following criteria are met: ▪ the financial arrangements rules apply to the financial arrangement, and ▪ the amalgamating company and the amalgamated company were members of the same wholly-owned group of companies for the whole of the income year before the amalgamation, and ▪ the method of calculating income and expenditure from the financial arrangement does not change after the amalgamation and the amalgamated company’s return is made on that basis, and ▪ the amalgamating company is not permitted to carry forward a loss balance from an earlier tax year for use in the tax year corresponding to the income year of the amalgamation unless s IE 2 allows all tax losses included in the loss balance, and arising from earlier tax years, to be attributed to the amalgamated company as a tax loss. Where the above conditions are satisfied, the amalgamated company may choose to adopt the following treatment:  ▪ under s FO 12(3), the amalgamating company is treated as if it had never been party to the financial arrangement. The base price adjustment calculation under s EW 31 is not applicable to the transfer of the financial arrangement or the obligations under it, and ▪ under s FO 12(4), the amalgamated company is treated as if it had taken the place of the amalgamating company in relation to the financial arrangement in terms of: □ the date the company entered into the arrangement, and □ the consideration paid, and □ the income derived, and □ the expenditure incurred, and □ the returns of income provided. Where s FO 12 does not apply and the method of calculating income or expenditure for the financial arrangement remains the same despite the amalgamation, the amalgamating company is treated as having disposed of the financial arrangement for consideration and the amalgamated company is treated as having acquired the financial arrangement for that consideration. Section FO 14 stipulates that in any other case where a transfer of a financial arrangement is made under a resident’s restricted amalgamation (and ss FO 12 and FO 13 do not apply) the amalgamating company is treated as having disposed of the financial arrangement and the consideration for the disposition is the market value of the financial arrangement on the date the amalgamated company acquires it. Law: IT07 ss FO 12, FO 13, FO 14  ¶20-110 Amalgamation: transfer of property or financial arrangements  If an amalgamated company acquires (on an amalgamation other than a resident’s restricted amalgamation) any property of an amalgamating company: ▪ the amalgamating company is treated as having disposed of the property for market value at the time of the amalgamation, and ▪ the amalgamated company is treated as having acquired the property at that market value. Where an amalgamated company acquires a financial arrangement, or obligations under it, from an amalgamating company on an amalgamation (other than a resident’s restricted amalgamation), the amalgamating company is treated as having disposed of the financial arrangement immediately before the amalgamation. The consideration for the disposal is the market price for assuming the obligations at the time of the amalgamation. The amalgamated company is treated as having acquired the financial arrangement immediately after the amalgamation for the market value of the property at the time of the amalgamation. Where an amalgamation is not a resident’s restricted amalgamation, the amalgamating company is treated as existing at the time of amalgamation for the purpose of s EE 41. This provision will apply where the amalgamating company that owns the asset satisfies the criteria for the associated person test with the amalgamated company. The effect of this section is that the (associated) amalgamated company will be prevented from making a larger depreciation claim than the amalgamating company could have made. Section EE 41 overrides ss FO 11 and FO 15. Law: IT07 ss EE 41, FO 11, FO 15  ¶20-111 Treatment of financial arrangements between amalgamating companies Where the parties to a financial arrangement amalgamate, the financial arrangement is treated as having been discharged immediately before the amalgamation. A base price adjustment  calculation must be made, irrespective of the kind of amalgamation. For resident’s restricted amalgamations, the treatment will then differ depending on whether the amalgamating company is solvent or insolvent. Sections FO 18, FO 19 and FO 20 clarify the way in which amalgamating companies must account for financial arrangements that exist between them. Resident’s restricted amalgamation where borrower is solvent or insolvent but likely to be able to meet its obligations under the financial arrangement Under a resident’s restricted amalgamation involving a solvent borrower: ▪ The consideration for the deemed discharge is the outstanding accrued balance for the financial arrangement. ▪ The outstanding accrued balance is calculated under the formula in s FO 19, being — consideration + prior expenditure + expenditure accrued in year – income accrued in year – consideration paid. ▪ The creditor is, in turn, deemed not to have remitted any amount in excess of the consideration treated as paid for the discharge for the purposes of the base price adjustment. Amalgamation that is not a resident’s restricted amalgamation or where borrower insolvent A borrower will be treated as insolvent where he or she cannot satisfy the test for solvency in s 4 of the Companies Act 1993. The solvency test requires a company to be able to meet its debts as they fall due and the value of its assets to exceed actual and contingent liabilities. Where either the amalgamation is not a resident’s restricted amalgamation or the borrower is insolvent immediately before the amalgamation and unlikely to be able to meet its obligations under the financial arrangement:  ▪ The borrower is treated as having paid the creditor the market value of the financial arrangement on the date of amalgamation as consideration for the deemed discharge. ▪ The creditor is, in turn, deemed to have remitted the excess over market value of its outstanding accrued balance of the financial arrangement. The consequence is that the debtor company will have financial arrangement income. The outstanding accrued balance in this case is calculated under the formula in s FO 20, being — consideration + prior income + income accrued in year – expenditure accrued in year – consideration paid. For discussion of other aspects of financial arrangements on an amalgamation, see ¶6-450 and ¶20-090. Law: IT07 ss FO 18, FO 19, FO 20  ¶20-112 Succession of rights and obligations in an amalgamation On amalgamation, the amalgamated company assumes all the rights and obligations of the amalgamating company or companies under the Inland Revenue Acts with respect to the tax year in which the amalgamation occurs and all previous tax years. See s 225 of the Companies Act 1993. In addition, the amalgamated company must file a tax return in respect of the amalgamating company or companies in the tax year of amalgamation. The period of the return will be from the beginning of the amalgamating company’s tax year to the date of amalgamation. The due date for the return will remain the same. Imputation credit account returns must also be filed for the amalgamating company or companies for the same period. These returns are due within two months of the date of amalgamation. The amalgamated company’s income tax return for the tax year of amalgamation will:  ▪ in the case of a new company, cover the period from the date of amalgamation to 31 March (or an approved alternative balance date), or ▪ be for the 12 months to the company’s balance date, when one of the amalgamating companies becomes the amalgamated company. Section FO 5 provides that the mere assumption by an amalgamated company of the liabilities and obligations of an amalgamating company does not result in the deriving or remission income or the allowance of a deduction for a remitted amount subsequently repaid. See the notes to IR’s form IR 432, “Declaration of an amalgamation”, for a summary of the amalgamating and amalgamated companies’ tax obligations in respect of GST, FBT, RWT, NRWT, PAYE, etc. See also ¶20-130–¶20-132 and ¶20-135. Building societies may use the amalgamation tax rules for companies. See s FO 4. Law: IT07 ss FO 4, FO 5; TAA s 76  ¶20-115 Bad debts or expenditure when amalgamating company ceases to exist Where an amalgamating company ceases to exist on a resident’s restricted amalgamation, the amalgamated company is entitled to a deduction for bad debts written off and for any expenditure or loss, including a depreciation loss, incurred as a result of something the amalgamating company did or did not do before the amalgamation. The amalgamated company is allowed the deduction under s DV 15(2) if the amalgamating company would have been allowed the deduction but for the amalgamation and the amalgamated company is not otherwise allowed the deduction. Law: IT07 ss DV 15(2), FO 8  ¶20-116 Unexpired accrual expenditure of amalgamating company that ceases to exist For an amalgamating company that ceases on amalgamation, the amount of any unexpired portion of prepaid expenditure of the amalgamating company for the income year of amalgamation is deemed to be the amalgamated company’s unexpired portion of the expenditure. Consequently, the amalgamating company should include this amount in its final tax return to the date of amalgamation. The amalgamated company will then be permitted to make a deduction for the unexpired portion of the expenditure in the year of amalgamation. Further, the income of the amalgamated company includes any amount derived by the amalgamated company after the amalgamation that is derived because of anything done or not done by the amalgamating company and that would have been income of the amalgamating company but for the amalgamation. Law: IT07 ss CV 4, FO 7, FO 9  ¶20-117 Interest on borrowings to acquire shares in amalgamating company that ceases to exist Section DB 8 permits interest to be deducted if it is payable by one company included in a group of companies in respect of money borrowed to acquire shares in another company included in that group. Section DB 8(3) confirms that a deduction for interest on money borrowed to acquire shares in an amalgamating company is preserved notwithstanding the company ceasing to exist on a resident’s restricted amalgamation. A deduction continues to be available provided the acquirer and the target were members of the same group of companies immediately before the resident’s restricted amalgamation. Law: IT07 s DB 8(3)–(5)  ¶20-120 Tax losses or tax credits in an amalgamation Whether losses arising before amalgamation to the amalgamated company, an amalgamating company or another company within the group can be utilised after a resident’s restricted amalgamation is governed by ss IA 9(3) and IE 1–IE 5. The intention of the provisions is to closely align them with existing rules governing the carry-forward and grouping of tax losses so that the amalgamation regime cannot be used to enable companies to carry forward or offset losses that would otherwise be lost. The provisions also apply to income tax losses, attributed CFC net losses, FIF net losses and to the crediting of CFC tax credits that arose before amalgamation. See s IQ 1(4). There are no specific provisions relating to amalgamations other than resident’s restricted amalgamations. Losses of an amalgamating company cannot be utilised by an amalgamated company after an amalgamation other than a resident’s restricted amalgamation, unless that amalgamating company becomes the amalgamated company and the general loss carry-forward and offset tests are met. Tax loss of the amalgamating company The tax loss of the amalgamating company under a resident’s restricted amalgamation may pass to the amalgamated company if the tax loss could have passed by grouping to the amalgamated company at the time of the amalgamation. See s IE 2. The requirement concerning the ability to group with the amalgamating company extends to any additional amalgamating company that amalgamates with the amalgamated company before use of the tax loss. This requirement effectively prevents the staggering of amalgamations with the objective of passing the tax loss of the amalgamating company to a company that was not in the same group of companies. Following the passing of the tax loss to the amalgamated company, that company may deduct the tax loss from its net income or carry  the tax loss forward for deduction from future net income subject to continuity requirements. Tax loss of the amalgamated company The amalgamated company under a resident’s restricted amalgamation may continue to carry forward an existing tax loss of that company only if the tax loss could have passed by grouping to the amalgamating company at the time of the amalgamation. This treatment ensures preservation of the tax losses of the amalgamated company under a resident’s restricted amalgamation between group companies. There is a qualification if the tax loss is a CFC net loss or an FIF net loss. There is preservation of both kinds of tax loss only if the amalgamated company and the amalgamating company are members of the same wholly-owned group of companies. See s IE 3. Section IE 3 ensures that an amalgamated company may only carry forward its tax losses from an earlier income year if both the following requirements are satisfied: ▪ the loss is able to be carried forward to the year under the continuity rules, and ▪ the loss could have been grouped against the net income of each of the other amalgamated companies. An ordering rule ensures that a carried forward tax loss of an amalgamated company must first be used to subtract from the company’s part-year net income (if any) up to the date of amalgamation. Any balance remaining may then be made available to the amalgamating companies under the grouping rules. The general tax rules do not apply to determine whether a loss of an amalgamated company carried forward into the year of amalgamation is able to continue to be carried forward from the amalgamation. Part-year tax loss  The part-year tax loss of a group member may be deducted from the net income of the amalgamated company only if the tax loss company, the amalgamated company and the amalgamating company together meet all requirements for the grouping of the tax loss at the time of the amalgamation. See s IE 4. Disregard of amalgamation for tax loss purposes The amalgamation may be disregarded for certain purposes concerning the treatment of a tax loss. The amalgamated company is treated as if it did not exist before the amalgamation and essentially “steps in to the shoes” of the amalgamating company with its accompanying shareholder profile. Reverting to the preamalgamation position is useful in determining whether the tax loss may: ▪ be used under the available options for use of the tax loss ▪ be grouped with the net income of another company, or ▪ be deducted from the net income of the amalgamated company by another group company. This treatment ensures that the removal of the amalgamating company by the amalgamation does not disturb the various shareholder continuity requirements for tax losses of the different kinds. See s IE 5. Example: A Ltd and B Ltd have the following shareholdings: A Ltd % B Ltd % Jon  70  50  Don  30  25  Kim  —  25  100%  100%  After four years A Ltd and B Ltd amalgamated with A Ltd as the amalgamated company and B Ltd the amalgamating company.  The post-amalgamation shareholding of A Ltd became: Jon  52%  Don  25.5%  Kim  22.5%  There is a pre-amalgamation tax loss carried forward by B Ltd as at the date of the amalgamation. A Ltd would be entitled to deduct the tax loss from its postamalgamation net income. Disregarding the amalgamation, the shareholding of Jon ensures compliance with the shareholder continuity requirement for the carry-forward of the tax loss.  In Selectrix Management Ltd v Registrar of Companies (2005) 22 NZTC 19,181 the shareholders of the amalgamating company became shareholders in the amalgamated company. Consequently the amalgamated company ceased to satisfy the 49% continuity shareholder requirement to be able to carry forward its preamalgamation tax losses. The High Court rejected the application for a declaration that the amalgamation was a nullity and of no legal effect. The pre-amalgamation tax loss was forfeited and unavailable to the amalgamated company upon the amalgamation. The treatment and use of tax credits when companies amalgamate is regulated by ss LK 12–LK 15. Law: IT07 ss IA 9(3), IE 1–IE 5, IQ 1(4), LK 12–LK 15  ¶20-125 Imputation credit account when amalgamating company ceases to exist Under a resident’s restricted amalgamation the imputation credits and debits recorded in the memorandum account of the amalgamating company pass to the amalgamated company with effect from the original credit and debit date. See s OA 9. This treatment extends to a credit or debit due to the amalgamating company but which is not actually recorded in the memorandum account of the amalgamating company before the amalgamation. See ss OA 10 and OB 24.  The provisions dealing with imputation credits and debits do not refer to the position under an amalgamation that is not a resident’s restricted amalgamation. In the absence of provisions ensuring their survival the credits and debits would be extinguished upon the amalgamation. Entry of the credit and debit in the memorandum account of the amalgamated company is on the same date as the corresponding record was made in the memorandum account of the amalgamating company. Essentially, the credits and debits are not “refreshed” by the amalgamation so that, for example, the shareholder continuity requirement for the carry forward of an imputation credit continues to apply from the date of credit to the memorandum account of the amalgamating company and not from the date of the amalgamation. The amalgamation is disregarded for the purpose of ascertaining for credit carry forward purposes whether there is a breach of the requirement for continuation of the required minimum market value interests where a market value circumstance exists. For the preamalgamation period, the amalgamated company is treated as if it did not separately exist and the amalgamated company was instead the amalgamating company with the same shareholder profile as the amalgamating company. This treatment ensures that the removal of the amalgamating company by the amalgamation does not disturb the requirements for the continued presence of imputation credits and debits together with other available credits. Avoidance provisions overcoming an arrangement to facilitate the carry forward of imputation credits continue to apply despite the amalgamation. The avoidance provisions are suitably modified to take account of the circumstances of the amalgamation. Law: IT07 ss OA 9, OA 10, OA 14, OA 15, OB 24, OB 53  ¶20-130 Provisional tax payments when amalgamating company ceases to exist  When an amalgamating company ceases to exist on amalgamation, the amalgamated company must comply with the amalgamating company’s obligations and liabilities under the Inland Revenue Acts for the tax year of amalgamation and all previous tax years. See s FO 4. To calculate the provisional tax instalments payable by the amalgamated company after amalgamation, the residual income tax of the amalgamated company for the tax year before the amalgamation, or the tax year preceding that year, is deemed to equal the combined prior year, or year preceding the prior year as applicable, residual income tax of all the amalgamating companies. This applies only for provisional tax payments due after the amalgamation. See s RC 33. Law: IT07 ss FO 4, RC 33  ¶20-131 Fringe benefit tax payment when amalgamating company ceases to exist Employers providing fringe benefits that are unclassified benefits may be exempt from fringe benefit tax (FBT) under certain circumstances. For an employer accounting for FBT on an annual or income-year basis, the total taxable value of unclassified benefits must not exceed $1,200 per employee pa or $22,500 per employer pa. See ¶21-555. Section RD 46 operates to proportionately reduce the $22,500 de minimis amounts where the employer ceases to exist on amalgamation or a new company is established on amalgamation. Paying FBT on a quarterly basis If the amalgamating company pays FBT on a quarterly basis, the $22,500 exemption figure is reduced for the quarter in which the amalgamation occurs. See ss RD 45(2)(b), RD 46(2) and (3). The amount of the reduction is calculated by multiplying $22,500 by the remaining days of the quarter, post-amalgamation, and dividing the product by the total number of days in the quarter. For an amalgamated (new) company which pays FBT quarterly, the amount  of the reduction is calculated by multiplying $22,500 by the number of days in the quarter before the amalgamation, and then dividing the product by the total number of days in the quarter. Paying FBT on an annual basis If the amalgamating company pays FBT annually, the $22,500 sum is multiplied by the number of days remaining in the year (postamalgamation) and the product divided by 365. See ss RD 45(3) and RD 46(4). If an amalgamated (new) company pays FBT annually, the reduction is calculated by multiplying $22,500 by the number of days in the year before amalgamation and dividing the product by 365. See ss RD 45(3) and RD 46(5). Law: IT07 ss CX 37, RD 45, RD 46  ¶20-132 Payment of PAYE and other withheld amounts when amalgamating company ceases to exist Where an amalgamating company ends its existence on a resident’s restricted amalgamation, any unsatisfied obligations of the amalgamating company in relation to the withholding and payment of tax become the obligations of the amalgamated company. See s RA 20. This would apply to amounts withheld such as PAYE, employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) and retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT). See also ¶20-112. Law: IT07 s RA 20  ¶20-135 Goods and services tax on an amalgamation Generally, a transfer of goods or services from an amalgamating company to an amalgamated company is deemed not to be a supply, so no GST is chargeable. If a registered amalgamated company acquires goods and services from an unregistered amalgamating company during an  amalgamation, the amalgamating company is treated as not having supplied those goods and services and the amalgamated company is deemed not to have paid for them. See s 61A(2) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act). However, where the amalgamated company is not registered for GST immediately after the amalgamation and the amalgamating company is registered immediately before the amalgamation, the goods and services are deemed to have been supplied for a consideration equal to their market value at the time of the amalgamation. See s 61A(3) of the GST Act. Where goods have been transferred on a GST-free basis and the use of the goods is subsequently changed, the adjustment required by ss 21–21H of the GST Act is calculated as if the amalgamated company had acquired those goods at the same time and at the same cost and for the same purpose as the amalgamating company. Where an amalgamating company ceases to exist on an amalgamation, all supplies made by it are treated as made by the amalgamated company. Any adjustment for non-deductible entertainment expenditure that the amalgamating company would have been required to make had it not amalgamated must be made instead by the amalgamated company. Similarly, any deduction for bad debts that would have been available to the amalgamating company shall be made available to the amalgamated company. See s 61A(4) and (5) of the GST Act. An amalgamation is deemed to occur on the last day of a taxable period in respect of a company that ceases to exist so that it is required to file a GST return up to that date. See s 15E(4) of the GST Act. Law: GST ss 15E(3), (4), 61A  ¶20-150 Qualifying companies and amalgamation Existing qualifying companies and loss-attributing qualifying companies (without the ability to attribute losses beyond 1 April  2011) may still amalgamate in accordance with the provisions set out in s FO 3(2). See ¶20-095. If a company that is not a qualifying company amalgamates with a qualifying company and ceases to exist on the amalgamation, the amalgamated company must pay qualifying company election tax under s HA 40. In addition, the tax losses of the amalgamating company are lost: see s HA 23. Law: IT07 ss FO 3(2), HA 23, HA 40  FRINGE BENEFIT TAX Introduction to fringe benefit tax  ¶21-010  Fringe Benefit Tax Generally  ¶21-020  Calculating and Paying FBT  ¶21-135  Fringe Benefit Tax and Motor Vehicles  ¶21-170  Loans to Employees  ¶21-340  Other Employment-Related Benefits Subject to FBT ¶21-425 Exemptions from FBT  ¶21-555  ¶21-010 Introduction to fringe benefit tax Fringe benefit tax (FBT) is a tax payable by an employer on the value of fringe benefits provided to employees. Broadly, a fringe benefit is a non-cash benefit provided by an employer to an employee in connection with employment. A common example is a motor vehicle provided to an employee that is available to be used privately as part of the employee’s remuneration package. The reason an employer, rather than an employee, is taxed is to encourage a shift to remuneration paid in cash rather than a payment in kind. It also helps to control administration, as it is easier to assess one employer rather than a multitude of employees. The Government introduced FBT primarily to widen the tax base, supply more revenue, improve equity (by ensuring non-cash benefits provided to employees were subject to tax) and improve resource allocation. An employer is taxed on all benefits provided to: ▪ employees — this applies to benefits provided or granted in relation to past, present or future employment by the employer (the concept of employment is therefore very wide), and  ▪ shareholder-employees. Fringe benefits are excluded income of the employee. The cost of providing a fringe benefit is deductible only if it meets the general permission and none of the general limitations apply. FBT itself is also deductible on this basis and is excluded from being a non-deductible ancillary tax by s DB 1. FBT is deductible in the income year the fringe benefit was provided or granted, even though the tax may not be due and payable in that year. The tax is imposed on a quarterly, annual or income-year basis on the value of the fringe benefits provided by the employer during that period, with payment due by a specified date after the end of the period. See ¶21-030. Special valuation rules apply to determine the taxable value of fringe benefits to which FBT rates are applied. Employers have the option to calculate FBT using either the single rate or alternate rate methods. Law: IT07 ss CX 2, CX 3, DB 1, RA 5(1)(b)  FRINGE BENEFIT TAX GENERALLY ¶21-020 Form of fringe benefit Fringe benefits come in many forms, including: ▪ making available to an employee a motor vehicle for private use ▪ an employment-related loan (including loans by a life insurer to a policyholder) ▪ subsidised transport ▪ contributions to a sickness, accident or death benefit fund ▪ contributions to funeral trusts ▪ any specified insurance premium  ▪ contributions to any insurance fund of a friendly society ▪ any contribution to any superannuation scheme ▪ any allowance paid in respect of a member of Parliament’s travel, accommodation, attendance or communications services to the extent that such services are exempt from tax, or ▪ any benefit of any other kind received by an employee. Certain benefits are excluded from FBT. See paragraphs beginning ¶21-555. Meaning of benefit FBT is payable when a “benefit” is provided to an employee. Inland Revenue has released “Questions we’ve been asked” item, “The Meaning of ‘Benefit’ for FBT Purposes”. Briefly, the item states: ▪ an employee does not need to have made a profit for a “benefit” to have been provided for FBT purposes ▪ a “benefit” means what is received by an employee, without regard to any contribution made by the employee ▪ a benefit is provided “in connection with the employment relationship” if the employment relationship is the reason for, or at least a substantial reason for, the provision of the benefit ▪ whether a benefit for which market value is paid by an employee is “in connection with” an employment relationship depends on the facts in each case ▪ whether a fringe benefit is provided does not depend on whether employees consider that they have received an advantage or benefit. The item is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 2, March 2006 at 26.  Law: IT07 s CX 2(1)(b)  ¶21-025 FBT — collection and returns Fringe benefit tax is returned on a quarterly, income year or annual basis. The quarterly basis is the default position unless employers meet the criteria for returning FBT on an annual or income year basis. Payment on quarterly basis Every employer who provides a fringe benefit and pays FBT on a quarterly basis must file an FBT return within 20 days from the end of each quarter showing: ▪ details of the benefits received or enjoyed by each of the employer’s employees in a quarter, and ▪ a calculation of the FBT payable on the taxable value of the fringe benefits. FBT is payable on 20 July, 20 October and 20 January, for the threemonth periods (or quarters) ending 30 June, 30 September and 31 December respectively. FBT for the quarter ended 31 March is payable on the 31 May following the end of that quarter. For example, the FBT return and any FBT payable for the quarter ended 31 March 2021 is due and payable on or before 31 May 2021. If an employer stops employing staff and does not intend to replace them during the year, the final FBT return and any associated FBT payable are due at the end of two months immediately following the end of the quarter in which the employer stops employing staff. For example, if an employer ceases to employ staff on 25 July 2021 (September 2021 quarter), the final FBT return and FBT payable are due on or before 30 November 2021. Payment on an income-year and annual basis An employer can elect to pay FBT in respect of employees on an annual basis where the employer is a small business (see ¶21-145) or on an income-year basis where the employer is a close company  and a small business providing benefits to shareholder-employees (see ¶21-150). Where an FBT return is made under the small business option, the return must be filed and the FBT paid by 31 May following the end of the relevant income year. If the employer has elected to pay FBT under the close company option, the employer will be liable to pay the total amount to the Commissioner no later than the terminal tax date of the employer for that income year. Change in periods If an employer who accounts for FBT under the close company option or the small business option fails to meet the relevant criteria for the use of those options, the employer must revert back to accounting for FBT on a quarterly basis (under the single rate option or the alternate rate option) from the beginning of the first day of the income year. An employer who accounts for FBT on either of the above bases may at any time elect by notice in writing to pay FBT on a quarterly basis. Where an employer with an approved alternative balance date elects to change from a quarterly basis of accounting for FBT, transitional provisions will apply to the period between the last quarter payment and the first day of the income year. That period will be treated as if it were a separate quarter and FBT will be paid accordingly. Returns online FBT returns may be filed online using the myIR service. Filing online is optional. Some of the FBT calculations will also be done automatically if returns are filed online. Law: IT07 ss RA 15, RD 60–RD 62; TAA ss 46B–46D  ¶21-030 Employment relationship for FBT purposes For a benefit to fall within the FBT provisions, it must be provided by an “employer” to an “employee” in connection with the employee’s “employment” (past, present or future).  “Employment” has a meaning corresponding to the meaning of “employee” and encompasses all activities carried on by an employee. An “employee” is a person who receives or is entitled to receive a PAYE income payment and an “employer” is a person who pays or is liable to pay a PAYE income payment. A “PAYE income payment” is a payment by way of salary, wages, an extra pay (bonuses, etc) or schedular payments (eg directors’ fees or payments to a commission agent or salesperson). See s RD 3(1) and ¶3-012. Excluded PAYE income payments Certain types of PAYE income payments do not give rise to an employment relationship for fringe benefit purposes. These are payments to a working partner that are deductible by virtue of s DC 4, payments to working owners that are deductible under s DC 3B, income-tested benefits, veterans’ pensions, New Zealand superannuation, parental leave payments, pre-term baby payments, any basic grant or independent circumstances grant made under s 645 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, s 193 of the Education Act 1964 or s 303 of the Education Act 1989) or an enactment substituted for that section, certain accident compensation earnings-related payments, and schedular payments referred to in sch 4 pt A, pt I and pt W. Law: IT07 ss CX 2, RD 25(2), YA 1  ¶21-040 Employer defined for FBT purposes An “employer” is any person who pays or is liable to pay (whether in the past, present or future) a PAYE income payment apart from those PAYE income payments that are specifically excluded (see ¶21-030 under the heading “Excluded PAYE income payments”). The definition of “employer” also includes each partner in the case of a partnership, a look-through company (unless the owner is a working owner), the manager (or principal officer) in the case of an unincorporated body of persons, a trustee or company liquidator (ie when property is controlled or vested in a fiduciary capacity) and the Crown when it provides taxable benefits to any employee.  Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶21-050 Employee defined for FBT purposes An “employee” is any person who receives or is entitled to receive (whether in the past, present or future) a PAYE income payment apart from PAYE income payments that are specifically excluded (see ¶21-030 under the heading “Excluded PAYE income payments”). This definition allows FBT to be levied on benefits arising at the time an employee derives no PAYE income payments but which relate to a time when PAYE income payments were made. For example, if a retired bus driver is given a free bus pass, that pass is a fringe benefit that arises by virtue of past employment and FBT is payable. The definition also includes some self-employed taxpayers who may not regard themselves as employees. Example 1: Fast Eddie works as a sales agent for a company as an independent contractor. He is paid on commission. The company provides him with unrestricted use of a car and a cellphone. Fast Eddie is an employee for FBT purposes because he receives PAYE income payments in the form of schedular payments. See ¶21-030.  Example 2: A taxpayer company paid directors’ fees to its directors. The directors were, therefore, employees for FBT purposes and received a fringe benefit when they received lowinterest loans. See Roma Properties Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,903 (CA).  A shareholder-employee of a close company may elect to opt out of the PAYE rules in relation to drawings taken from the company in anticipation of a salary being subsequently declared and such a shareholder-employee is subject to the FBT rules. Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶21-060 FBT — benefits provided by another party  When a benefit is provided by some other person under an “arrangement” with an employer, the employer is treated as having provided the benefit, and liability for FBT arises accordingly (s CX 2(2)). “Arrangement” means a contract, agreement, plan or understanding (whether or not enforceable) and all steps and transactions by which it is carried into effect. An example would be when benefits are provided by a parent company to employees of a subsidiary. In this case, the subsidiary employer company would be regarded as providing the benefit and would be liable for FBT. In addition, s CX 2(5) provides that a benefit may be treated as being provided by an employer to an employee under s GB 31, which deals with a tax avoidance arrangement (see below), and under s GB 32, which deals with a benefit being provided to an associate of an employee (see ¶21-080). Public ruling In public binding ruling BR Pub 14/10, “FBT — provision of benefits by third parties — s CX 2(2)” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 1, February 2015 at 9), Inland Revenue states that s CX 2(2) of the Income Tax Act 2007 will apply in the following situations: ▪ consideration passes from the employer to the third party for the benefit being provided ▪ the employer requests (other than merely initiating contact), instructs or directs the third party to provide a benefit ▪ there is negotiation or discussion between the employer and the third party that (explicitly or implicitly) involves the threat or suggestion that the employer would withhold business or other benefits from the third party unless a benefit is provided to the employees, or ▪ the third party and the employer are associated parties and there is a group policy (whether formal or informal) or any other agreement between the associated parties that employees of the group will be entitled to receive benefits from the other companies in the group.  The ruling also provides that s CX 2(2) will not apply where: ▪ there is negotiation or discussion between the employer and the third party that results in no more than: □ the employer granting the third party access to the premises or work environment to discuss the benefit with employees, and/or □ agreement between the parties as to the level of benefit that is to be offered by the third party to employees, and/or □ the employer agreeing to advertise or make known the availability of the benefit ▪ the employer has done no more than initiate contact or discussions with the third party, or ▪ there is no significant contact between the employer and the third party. The ruling does not apply to arrangements where the remuneration given by an employer to an employee is reduced because a benefit has been received from the third party, or otherwise takes the receipt of a benefit provided by a third party into account (including salary sacrifice situations). There cannot be any trade-off between the benefits provided and the remuneration that would otherwise have been received by the employee, or any difference between the remuneration levels of employees who receive benefits and those who do not. Public binding ruling BR Pub 14/10 applies for an indefinite period beginning on the first day of the 2014–15 income year. Anti-avoidance provision An arrangement under which persons attempt to alter their relationship so that there is no employment involved is countered by s GB 31. This section can apply when avoidance is only one of the purposes of the arrangement, so long as avoidance is not merely an  incidental purpose. When taxpayers are involved in an FBT avoidance arrangement, the Commissioner can treat: ▪ a party to the arrangement as the employer ▪ the recipient of the benefit as the employee, and ▪ the benefit being passed from the deemed employer to the deemed employee (or what would have been the benefit had the arrangement not been entered into) as being provided by virtue of the employment of the deemed employee. FBT will apply accordingly throughout the period(s) during which the arrangement is in force. See also ¶21-130. Law: IT07 ss CX 2(2), (5), GB 31, YA 1  ¶21-070 Fringe benefits provided to shareholderemployees or group investment fund investors Any non-cash benefit provided or granted by a corporate employer to a shareholder-employee is treated as having been received by that shareholder-employee in his or her capacity as an employee unless the company elects to treat the benefit as a dividend (see below). If the company does not elect for the benefit to be treated as a dividend, the FBT rules apply. In similar terms, where a non-cash benefit is granted by the trustee of a group investment fund to an employee and investor in the fund, the benefit is treated as having been received by the employee and investor in his or her capacity as an employee unless the trustee of the group investment fund elects to treat the benefit as a dividend. An exception applies in respect of non-executive company directors. In such a case, any non-cash benefit (which would otherwise be subject to FBT) is treated as having been derived in that employee’s capacity as a shareholder of the company and, as such, is taxable to that person as a dividend. See ss CD 20(2), CX 17(3) and ¶16-585.  Election criteria A company or trustee of a group investment fund that provides a non-cash benefit to an employee who holds shares in the company or who is an investor in the fund may elect to treat the benefit as a fringe benefit or a dividend. This only applies if the benefit would: ▪ if not for s CD 32, be a dividend under s CD 4 if provided to the person in their capacity as a shareholder, and ▪ if not for s CX 4, be an unclassified benefit if it was provided to the person in their capacity as an employee. Where the company or trustee elects to treat the benefit as a fringe benefit, they must give notice to Inland Revenue of their election within the time allowed for filing an FBT return for the period in which the benefit was provided. See s CX 17(5). In this situation the FBT rules will not apply. If the company or trustee makes no election, the benefit is treated as a fringe benefit. There is no option to elect in respect of benefits provided to nonexecutive directors. Where the non-cash benefit provided to a shareholder in a company is subject to the mixed-use asset rules (see ¶10-035) the company must elect to treat the benefit as a dividend. Exclusion for close companies and motor vehicle benefits With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, s CX 17 provides an exclusion for close companies for motor vehicle benefits provided to a shareholder-employee where the close company has elected to apply the motor vehicle expenditure rules in subpart DE (see ¶10-710) instead of the FBT rules. Where that election is made, the benefit will be neither a fringe benefit nor a dividend. The exclusion only applies to close companies where the total fringe benefits provided to all employees in the income year are one or two motor vehicles.  The election only applies to new motor vehicle arrangements. Section CX 17(4C) provides that an election may be made for the income year that includes the day on which the close company acquires the motor vehicle or first starts using it for business use. The election will continue to apply until the end of the income year that includes the earlier of the day the company stops using the motor vehicle for business use or the day the company disposes of it: s CX 17(4D). The close company must give notice to the Commissioner of the election in the time allowed for filing their return for the income year in which the election was made. Law: IT07 ss CD 20, CX 17, DG 2(4)  ¶21-080 FBT — benefit to associated person of employee Section GB 32 provides that where a fringe benefit is provided by an employer to a person associated with the employee, the employee is treated as receiving the fringe benefit. There are two exceptions to this general rule. The first is where benefits are provided by a company to corporate associates of shareholder-employees. Where the benefit is not provided under an arrangement that has a purpose of providing the benefit in lieu of employment income or free from FBT, the benefit will not be subject to FBT, although it may be subject to the dividend regime. The second exception is when benefits are provided by look-through companies, partnerships or limited partnerships and the person associated with the employee is an owner of the look-through company or a partner in the partnership or limited partnership. Association with employee and shareholder An intention of both the FBT rules and the dividend rules is to tax non-cash benefits when derived by associated persons. Conflicts arise when a person (other than a company) receives a non-cash benefit from a company and that person is not only associated with an employee of that company but is also associated with a shareholder of that company.  In those circumstances, s CX 18 provides that when: ▪ the benefit would be treated as a fringe benefit under s GB 32, and ▪ the benefit would be a dividend if provided to the shareholder, the non-cash benefit is subject to the FBT rules and is treated as not being a dividend. Example: Virginia is an employee of Big Blouses Ltd, a company that makes shirts and other clothing. Her mother is the major shareholder. Her father often buys shirts from the company at staff discount (which is available to employees’ families). The discounted goods are subject to FBT. Virginia’s father is associated with both an employee and a shareholder of the company. The discounted goods would be treated as a benefit provided to Virginia under s GB 32(3) and they would also be treated as a dividend if provided to Virginia’s mother. Section CX 18 provides that the FBT rules apply and the discounted goods are not a dividend.  Law: IT07 ss CX 18, GB 32  ¶21-090 FBT and late payment penalties Any amount of FBT not paid by the due date attracts an initial penalty of 5%. This penalty is charged incrementally. A penalty of 1% is applied the day after the due date for unpaid tax and 4% is applied seven days after the due date. An incremental monthly penalty of 1% applies on the amount of FBT outstanding, plus the initial late payment penalties, for each successive month until payment. Such late payment penalties are not deductible for income tax purposes. See s DB 1(1). Taxpayers are notified the first time they make a late payment of tax. The late payment penalty will then only be imposed if the payment is not made within one month after the date of the notice. However, if the taxpayer makes other late payments within two years of the due  date of the first late payment, the late payment penalty will be imposed as usual from the day after the due date. The late filing penalty imposed by s 139A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 does not apply to FBT returns. Law: TAA s 139B  ¶21-100 FBT assessed by Commissioner The Commissioner may make an assessment of the amount of FBT in respect of any quarter or any income year to be paid by any person chargeable with the tax. That person is then liable for the tax assessed unless the person establishes otherwise in proceedings challenging the assessment. This procedure may be used by the Commissioner if, for example, an employer fails to make a return or the Commissioner is dissatisfied with the return. The assessment procedure is the same as for income tax. Law: TAA s 93  ¶21-110 Deductibility of FBT FBT is deductible in the income year in which the employer provides or grants the benefit that gives rise to the tax. This will not necessarily be the same tax year as the tax year in which the employer pays FBT. See ¶10-292. Employers with a non-standard balance date who pay FBT on a quarterly basis will find that they may have an FBT quarter that spans two tax years. In this case, the Commissioner’s policy is that the FBT on benefits provided by the employer before the end of the earlier tax year is deductible in that earlier year and benefits provided in the later tax year are deductible in that year. Employers who pay FBT on an annual or income-year basis will deduct FBT in the tax year in which the employer provides the benefit to which the FBT relates (even if the FBT is not paid on that benefit until the next tax year). See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 13, May 1995 at 10.  Deductibility of FBT means that the effective rate of tax is 33% (assuming FBT is paid at 49.25%) for taxpayers. Law: IT07 s EF 1  ¶21-115 Fringe benefits and goods and services tax The supply of a fringe benefit is deemed to be a supply of goods and services, so a GST-registered employer is generally liable for GST output tax on fringe benefits provided to employees. There is no deemed supply for GST purposes if: ▪ the employee paid an amount for the receipt or enjoyment of the fringe benefit ▪ the fringe benefit arose by virtue of an exempt supply ▪ the fringe benefit arose by virtue of a zero-rated supply, or ▪ the fringe benefit is, or is deemed to be, provided or granted by a registered person in the course of making exempt supplies. Time of supply The time of supply is the time at which the fringe benefit is (or is deemed to be) provided or granted. See s 21I(1)–(3) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. GST-registered employers must include and pay the GST on fringe benefits with their FBT return. This GST payment is treated as a payment of FBT for the purposes of filing the FBT return and Pts 4A (disputes procedures), 6 (assessments), 7 (interest), 9 (penalties), 10 (recoveries) and 11 (remission, relief, and refunds) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Consideration for the supply The consideration for the supply of a fringe benefit for GST purposes is deemed to be the taxable value of the fringe benefit, as determined under the FBT rules in the Income Tax Act 2007. The taxable value of a fringe benefit under the FBT rules is inclusive of  GST if the GST-registered employer can claim an input tax credit for the benefit provided. Low-interest loans and the provision of accommodation are exempt from GST, so the FBT value of such items is GST-exclusive. The provisions applying to subsidised transport, superannuation scheme contributions and goods and services stipulate that FBT is calculated on a GST-inclusive basis. Deductible GST on fringe benefits is deductible for income tax purposes to the extent that the person is allowed a deduction for expenditure incurred in acquiring or producing the goods or services or they are allowed a deduction for an amount of depreciation loss for the goods or services. Law: IT07 ss DB 2(2), RD 33(4), RD 37(2), RD 40(3), RD 41(4); GST ss 10(7), 21I(1)–(3), 23A  ¶21-120 FBT and entertainment Entertainment specified in s DD 2 is subject to FBT if: ▪ the employee can choose when to enjoy the benefit or the benefit is enjoyed outside New Zealand, and ▪ the benefit is not received or used in the course of, or as a necessary consequence of, the employee’s employment duties. Example 1: FBT is payable on the value of a meal voucher awarded to an employee as part of an incentive scheme. The meal can be enjoyed at the employee’s discretion and it is not enjoyed in the course of the employee’s employment duties.  Example 2: An all-expenses paid trip, staying in a time-share resort in Hawaii, is offered as a sales incentive to staff who achieve certain targets. The cost of the trip is subject to  FBT because the benefit is enjoyed outside New Zealand and is not enjoyed in the course of employment duties.  Example 3: A sales representative travels to Napier, where she takes a client out for dinner. The business contact is a guest, therefore the cost of both meals is 50% deductible. FBT is not payable in this instance so long as the benefit is consumed or engaged as part of the sales representative’s employment duties.  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 12, May 1995 at 18–19. Law: IT07 ss CX 29, DD 2  ¶21-125 FBT — employer who stops employing or providing fringe benefits Employers who stop employing staff and do not intend to replace them during the tax year must calculate FBT for the quarter in which they stop employing. Employers in this situation may apply the alternate rate calculation to the fringe benefits provided or pay FBT at 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years). If the single rate option is chosen, employers must calculate the FBT payable for the period from the start of the tax year to the date on which the employer stops employing staff. The final amount of FBT payable is determined by deducting any earlier payments made. If the alternate rate calculation is chosen, the quarter in which the employer stops employing is treated as a final quarter. This does not apply if benefits continue to be provided to former employees. The due date for filing of the final return and payment of FBT is two months after the end of the quarter in which the employer stops employing staff. For example, if an employer ceases to employ staff on 25 July 2021 (September 2021 quarter), the final FBT return and FBT payable are due on or before 30 November 2021.  A return is required even if an employer has not provided or granted any fringe benefits during the relevant quarter. However, the Commissioner may exempt employers from the need to file nil returns. Inland Revenue’s (IR) “Fringe benefit tax guide”, IR 409, October 2020, states that employers who do not provide or do not intend to provide fringe benefits may apply for “nil status”. Further, employers who have provided fringe benefits in any of the first three quarters but have since ceased to provide fringe benefits must file quarterly returns up to and including the fourth quarter. “Nil status” will apply after the fourth quarter. See p 9 of the IR guide. Employers that no longer intend to provide fringe benefits to their employees may be advised to file a “fringe benefit tax election” so that their intention to become a nil filer is triggered and recorded within IR’s system. This form can be completed and sent electronically through the “Online Services” pages of IR’s website at www.ird.govt.nz. Law: IT07 s RD 63; TAA s 46B(6)  ¶21-130 FBT — anti-avoidance adjustment If an arrangement is void under the general anti-avoidance provision in s BG 1 (see ¶33-010) and the arrangement involves altering the incidence of FBT, the Commissioner may adjust the amount of fringe benefit (ie excluded income) received by a person affected by the arrangement to counteract any tax advantage obtained by that person. When determining the amount of any adjustment, the Commissioner may have regard to the amount of fringe benefit that the person affected would have had if the arrangement had not been made. The Commissioner may also have regard to the amount of fringe benefit that the affected person would have had if that person had been allowed to have some or all of the benefits that have been derived by any other person under the arrangement. Income that arises as a result of an adjustment under s GA 2 is income only of the affected person. Law: IT07 s GA 2  CALCULATING AND PAYING FBT ¶21-135 Methods of calculating and paying FBT Employers who provide fringe benefits have three methods by which FBT can be calculated and paid to Inland Revenue. Using the single or alternate rate, these are: ▪ the single or alternate rate options for quarterly filers ▪ the close company option for close company employers in respect of fringe benefits provided to shareholder-employees, and ▪ the small business option for small employers. Certain criteria must be met to use the last two options listed above. Election of single or alternate rate An employer can use the single or alternate rate regardless of the method used to file FBT returns. An election is made by filing an FBT return stipulating the rate chosen. The election made to use the alternate rate option is irrevocable. The general effect of the alternate rate option is that FBT is payable either at 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) or at a rate based upon the remuneration paid to the employee. Employers paying on an annual or income-year basis must pay FBT applying the alternate rate option on a yearly basis (see ¶21-160 and ¶21-165) or pay at the rate of 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) of the taxable value of fringe benefits provided for the year. An employer who has paid FBT at 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) for the year may subsequently request the Commissioner to amend the FBT liability so that it is calculated under the alternate rate option (ie a retrospective election is made to apply the alternate rate option). This request, together with the necessary information, must be given to the Commissioner within  two months of the date of the notice of assessment for FBT for the final quarter or income year.  ¶21-140 Quarterly filing Employers are usually required to file FBT returns on a quarterly basis unless they qualify for and elect to use the small business option (¶21-145) or the close company option (¶21-150). Quarterly filers have two options to calculate their FBT liability in quarters 1 to 3: ▪ 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) single rate, or ▪ 49.25% (43% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) alternate rate. Single rate option Under the single rate option, employers pay FBT at a rate of 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) of the taxable value of fringe benefits provided to employees in all four quarters. This is the most administratively easy option, but it can result in overpayment if employees earn less than $180,000 ($70,000 for the 2020–21 and previous income years) a year (the rate of 63.93% is a “gross-up” of the top personal marginal tax rate of 39% (for the 2020–21 and previous income years, the rate of 49.25% was a gross-up of the 33% tax rate)). Employers using the single rate option can still choose to do the alternate rate calculation for the final quarter. Alternate rate option Under the alternate rate option, employers can choose to pay FBT at the rate of 63.93% or 49.25% (49.25% or 43% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) of the taxable value of fringe benefits provided to employees in the first three quarters. If the entity has elected and paid FBT using the alternate rate option in any of the  first three quarters, it must complete the alternate rate calculation option in the fourth (and final) quarter. For the fourth (and final) quarter, a detailed calculation is required to determine the amount of FBT payable. This is like a square-up calculation and requires fringe benefits to be attributed to particular employees. FBT paid in the first three quarters is then subtracted from the fourth quarter calculation to arrive at the amount payable. Law: IT07 ss RD 58, RD 59; TAA s 46B  ¶21-145 Small business option for calculating FBT Certain employers can elect to furnish FBT returns on an annual basis. Employers are eligible for this where their gross amounts of PAYE and employer’s superannuation contributions tax in the preceding tax year did not exceed $1m or where they were not employers in the preceding tax year. In the case of an employer ceasing business and beginning a new one, or operating two or more businesses, the gross amounts of PAYE and employer’s superannuation contributions tax will be aggregated for the purposes of calculating the employer’s eligibility. If an eligible employer wishes to take advantage of the annual basis, the employer must elect to do so. The Commissioner must be informed of the election. This election must state the first year to which the election is to apply. For existing employers at 1 April (in any year) the Commissioner must be informed by 30 June in the year in which the election is first to apply. For new employers, the Commissioner must be informed no later than the last day of the calendar quarter in which the employer first became an employer of employees (other than shareholder-employees). Payment and returns Once a valid election has been made, an employer will apply FBT on an annual basis in respect of the employer’s employees. The calculation of FBT will be made as if the fringe benefits were provided in the four consecutive quarters that comprise that year. The return must be forwarded to the Commissioner no later than 31  May following the end of the year to which the FBT return relates. The return must be in a prescribed form (form IR 422) and set out the FBT payable on the taxable value of fringe benefits received or enjoyed by each employee (excluding shareholder-employees) in that year. Employers can either pay FBT at the rate of 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) or use the alternate rate calculation. Law: IT07 s RD 61; TAA s 46C  ¶21-150 Close company option for calculating FBT An employer that is a close company that provides fringe benefits to shareholder-employees may elect to pay FBT on an income-year basis, provided that one of the following specific criteria in s RD 60 is satisfied for the preceding income year: ▪ the employer’s gross amounts of PAYE and employer’s superannuation contribution tax for the tax year did not exceed $1m, or ▪ the only fringe benefit provided was the private use of a motor vehicle, and it was limited to making one or two vehicles available to shareholder-employees for their private use, or ▪ the employer did not employ any employees. The term “shareholder-employee” has been given a special meaning for the purposes of the FBT regime. Broadly, it means a shareholderemployee of a close company who receives payments that are not subject to PAYE pursuant to s RD 3(2) to (4) (see ¶3-012). Election and returns Where the employer is an existing employer, they must inform the Commissioner of their decision no later than the last day of the calendar quarter in which the income year of election begins. If the employer has an early balance date, the $1m threshold for gross  amounts of PAYE and employer’s superannuation contribution tax is adjusted. Where the employer is not an employer in the preceding year, the Commissioner must be informed no later than the last day of the calendar quarter in which that employer first became an employer. If an employer who chooses to pay FBT on an income-year basis has, before the election is made, been paying FBT on a quarterly basis, an FBT calculation must be made for the transitional period. This period will begin from the end of the last full tax year for which FBT is paid on a quarterly basis and end on the day before the beginning of the first income year for which the election applies. See s RD 62(5). This calculation is completed as if it is the FBT return for a final quarter. The transitional calculation will be included in the employer’s FBT return due on 31 May. See s RD 60(5). Where an election has been made to account on an income-year basis, an employer is required to furnish a return by the terminal tax date for that year in respect of the income year to which the FBT return relates. FBT liability will also be due on the same terminal tax date. Employers can either pay FBT at the rate of 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) or use the alternate rate calculation. Note that with effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, the motor vehicle expenditure rules in subpart DE have been extended to allow close companies to use the rules as an alternative to paying FBT on a motor vehicle benefit provided to shareholder-employees. This will mean that some close companies will not have to register for and pay FBT simply because of the provision of a motor vehicle to one or two employees. See ¶21-070. Law: IT07 ss RA 15, RD 60, RD 62(5); TAA s 46C  ¶21-155 Attributed fringe benefits Under the alternate rate calculation, employers must attribute certain fringe benefits to employees and calculate FBT based on the level of  their remuneration. The following types of fringe benefits must be attributed to each employee to whom the benefit is provided or granted: ▪ making available a motor vehicle for private use ▪ employee loans (excluding loans owing to life insurers) ▪ benefits with a total taxable value of $1,000 or more per category per year per employee, where the benefits are: □ the provision of subsidised transport (see exception below) □ contributions to any sickness, accident or death benefit fund □ contributions to an employer fund meeting the circumstances described in s CW 45 (Funeral trusts) (see ¶24-134) □ payments of specified insurance premiums or contributions to any insurance fund of a friendly society, or □ contributions to any superannuation scheme (except employers cash contributions). See ¶21-540 and ¶21-574. (each of these is treated as a separate category), and ▪ any unclassified benefit provided with a taxable value of $2,000 or more per year per employee. If any of the above fringe benefits are provided or granted to more than one employee, the employer must attribute the benefit to the employee who principally uses, enjoys or receives the benefit during the quarter or income year. If the benefit is the availability of a motor vehicle for the employee’s private use, this benefit must be attributed to the employee to whom the vehicle is principally made available for such use during the quarter or income year. Where the principal employee cannot be determined, the benefit must be pooled (see ¶21-164).  Benefits excluding motor vehicles and employee loans With respect to the last two types of attributed benefits set out above, the taxable value of which is less than $1,000 or $2,000, as the case may be, the employer must either: ▪ attribute these benefits to all employees receiving them, or ▪ pool them (see ¶21-160). If the first option is chosen, all the fringe benefits provided within that category which have an annual taxable value of less than $1,000 or $2,000, as the case may be, must be attributed to all employees receiving those benefits. Example: Employer Co has paid gym membership fees for employees 1, 2 and 3 during the 20X2–X3 tax year. The fees paid are $500 each (a total of $1,500). As the taxable value of this category of benefit provided is less than $2,000 for the year (no “other” benefits are provided), Employer Co has the option of either attributing this to each employee, or pooling the benefit. If Employer Co wishes to attribute the fees paid, it must do so for each of employees 1, 2 and 3.  The thresholds of $1,000 or $2,000 may be amended by regulation. Subsidised transport A special rule is provided for the provision of subsidised transport with a taxable value of $1,000 or more per year. If all of the employer’s employees have the same or similar entitlement to the subsidised transport, the employer may pool this particular category of fringe benefit. Law: IT07 ss RD 47–RD 49  ¶21-160 Non-attributed fringe benefits Fringe benefits that are not attributed to employees must be pooled and, for the final quarter, different rates of FBT applied to two different pools. Two separate pools must therefore be made: one for  benefits provided to employees who are major shareholders or their associates (if the associate does not receive the fringe benefit as an employee of the employer); and the other for employees who are not major shareholders. FBT is then calculated at 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) for the first pool (employees who are major shareholders) and 49.25% (42.86% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) for the second pool (employees who are not major shareholders). Non-attributed fringe benefits that must be pooled The following non-attributed fringe benefits must be pooled: ▪ Fringe benefits with a total taxable value of less than $1,000 per category per year which have not been attributed to a particular employee, being benefits of the following type: □ subsidised transport □ contribution to any sickness, accident or death benefit fund □ contributions to a funeral expenses fund meeting the circumstances described in s CW 45 (Funeral trusts) (see ¶24-134) □ payment of any specified insurance premium or any contribution to any insurance fund of a friendly society, or □ contribution to any superannuation scheme (except employers cash contributions). See ¶21-540 and ¶21-574. ▪ Other fringe benefits with a taxable value of less than $2,000 per year which have not been attributed to a particular employee. ▪ If elected by the employer, the provision of subsidised transport with a value of $1,000 or more per year, where all of the employees have the same or similar entitlement to the subsidised transport. ▪ Benefits that cannot be attributed to a particular employee.  ▪ Benefits provided or granted to a former employee. ▪ Loans owing to life insurers. Law: IT07 s RD 53  ¶21-165 Alternate rate calculation for attributed fringe benefits An employer who attributes a fringe benefit to an employee must calculate FBT in accordance with the following formula: tax on all-inclusive pay − tax on cash pay where: tax on all-inclusive pay is the amount of applying the rates in sch 1 pt C, table 1 to the employee’s all-inclusive pay, and tax on cash pay is the amount calculated in accordance with s RD 51(3)(b) or (4)(b). See below. The FBT rates for attributed fringe benefits are set out at ¶50-081. Alternatively, an employer may pay FBT on attributed benefits at the single rate of 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020–21 and previous income years). This avoids having to do the alternate rate calculation. All-inclusive pay Every employer who attributes a fringe benefit and applies the alternate rates must calculate the all-inclusive pay for each employee. The formula for this calculation differs depending on whether the employee is a major shareholder. Briefly, a “major shareholder” is defined as any person who owns, or has in any way the power to control, or the right to acquire, 10% or more of the ordinary shares or voting interests of the company, including any person with 10% or more of the control of the company by any other means. The calculations are as follows:  ▪ For an employee who is not a major shareholder: cash pay −  tax on cash pay  +  taxable value of all fringe benefits  where: cash pay is generally the cash paid to, credited to or applied on account of the employee by the employer or a related employer during the year. The definition excludes the taxable value of any fringe benefits provided or granted (see s RD 51(4)) tax on cash pay is generally the tax on the cash pay calculated at the employee’s marginal tax rate taxable value of all fringe benefits is the taxable value of all fringe benefits attributed to the employee in the tax year. ▪ For an employee who is a major shareholder: cash pay −  tax on cash pay  +  taxable value of all fringe benefits  where: cash pay is the cash paid to, credited to or applied on account of the employee by the employer or a related employer, plus dividends and interest derived from the employer or a related employer (if the related employer is the one who pays or credits the remuneration or who applies the remuneration on account of the employee) (see s RD 51(3)) tax on cash pay is generally the tax on the cash pay calculated at the employee’s marginal tax rate taxable value of all fringe benefits is generally the taxable value of all fringe benefits attributed to the employee and  his or her associate (if the associate does not receive the benefit as an employee of the employer) in the income year. In both definitions of “cash pay”: ▪ an employer is a related employer if it is a branch or division, or an associated person, and ▪ the term “pay” means: □ salary or wages □ salary, wages or income derived by a shareholderemployee of a close company otherwise than from PAYE income payments □ an amount attributed in accordance with the income attribution rules □ extra pays, and □ schedular payments. The tax on cash pay is calculated as if the cash pay as defined (ie including remuneration from a related employer) is the only taxable income received by the employee. The main differences in the two formulas are that the FBT calculation for an employee who is a major shareholder includes dividends and interest derived from the employer, and fringe benefits provided to associated persons. The FBT calculation for other employees does not. Attributed benefits provided to shareholder-employees or employees receiving attributed income For quarterly or annual filers who, at the time of filing their returns, do not have sufficient information to make the alternate rate calculation, there is a special rule in s RD 52 for calculating the FBT on benefits attributed to shareholder-employees of close companies  receiving non-PAYE income deducted income or attributed income under the income attribution rules. In this case, the employer may do either of the following: ▪ pay FBT on attributed benefits at 49.25% (42.86% for the 2020– 21 and previous income years) and carry out the alternate rate calculation in relation to those benefits in the following tax year, or ▪ pay FBT on attributed benefits at 63.93% (49.25% for the 2020– 21 and previous income years), in which case no subsequent calculation is required. If the first option is chosen, FBT payable at the rate of 49.25% (42.86% for the 2020–21 and previous income years) is deducted from the result of the alternate rate calculation formula in s RD 50. Section RD 51(5) specifically provides that, for the purpose of the alternate rate calculation, the non-PAYE income, payment income or attributed income is treated as the employee’s cash pay in the year after the year in which the amount was derived or attributed. For example, income attributed in the 2019–20 income year is included in the employee’s cash pay in the 2019–20 tax year. Example: Pop Co Ltd has provided the following fringe benefits per quarter to its employees. No benefits are provided to major shareholders. Pop Co Ltd pays FBT on a quarterly basis and has paid FBT at 49.25% for the first and second quarters and 43% in the third quarter of the 2019–20 tax year. Assume that Pop Co Ltd chooses to apply the alternate rates. Annual Pay Paid to Employee ($)  Taxable Value of Motor Vehicle ($)  Taxable Value Taxable Value of of Medical Superannuation Insurance Contributions Contributions ($) ($)  Taxable Value of Unclassified Benefits ($)  CEO  85,000  3,500  1,000  200  3,000  Manager 1  65,000  2,500  800  200  1,000  Manager 2  55,000  200  900  Employee 1  43,000  200  320  Employee 2  40,000  200  320  Employee 3  35,000  200  320  1,200  5,860  Total Total value of all benefits  6,000  1,800  14,860  Pop Co Ltd must attribute to the respective employees: ▪ the motor vehicles, and ▪ the superannuation contributions (because the total taxable value of this category of benefits provided per employee per year exceeds $1,000). Pop Co Ltd must also attribute the unclassified benefits provided to the CEO, Manager 1 and Manager 2. Pop Co Ltd is not required to attribute the medical insurance because the total taxable value of this category of benefits provided per employee per year does not exceed $1,000. Assume that Pop Co Ltd chooses to attribute this benefit. Pop Co Ltd may attribute the unclassified benefits provided to Employees 1, 2 and 3 if it chooses. There is a choice for these benefits provided to these employees, as the total taxable value of this category of benefits provided per employee per year does not exceed $2,000. Assume Pop Co Ltd chooses not to attribute the unclassified benefits provided to Employees 1, 2 and 3 purely for operational reasons. The FBT liability for Pop Co is as follows: Step 1: Calculate the all-inclusive pay for each employee: Cash pay − tax on cash pay + taxable value of fringe benefit CEO  85,000 − 18,970 + (4 × (3,500 + 1,000 + 200 + 3,000))  96,830  Manager 1  65,000 − 12,520 + (4 × (2,500 + 800 + 200 + 1,000))  70,480  Manager 2  55,000 − 9,520 + (4 × (200 + 900))  49,880  Employee 1  43,000 − 6,545 + (4 × 200)  37,255  Employee 2  40,000 − 6,020 + (4 × 200)  34,780  Employee 3  35,000 − 5,145 + (4 × 200)  30,655  Step 2: Calculate the tax on all-inclusive pay for each employee: CEO  (12,530 × 0.1173) + ((40,580 − 12,530) × 0.2121) + ((55,980 − 40,580) × 0.4286) + ((96,830 − 55,980) × 0.4925)  34,138.25  Manager 1  (12,530 × 0.1173) + ((40,580 − 12,530) × 0.2121) + ((55,980 − 40,580) × 0.4286) + ((70,480 − 55,980) × 0.4925)  21,160.87  Manager 2  (12,530 × 0.1173) + ((40,580 − 12,530) × 0.2121) + ((49,880 − 40,580) × 0.4286)  11,405.16  Employee 1  (12,530 × 0.1173) + ((37,255 − 12,530) × 0.2121)  6,713.94  Employee 2  (12,530 × 0.1173) + ((34,780 − 12,530) × 0.2121)  6,189.00  Employee 3  (12,530 × 0.1173) + ((30,655 − 12,530) × 0.2121)  5,314.08  Step 3: Calculate the FBT on attributed benefits for each employee: Tax on all-inclusive pay − tax on cash pay ▸ Note: The tax on cash pay has been calculated as part of Step 1. CEO  34,138.25 − 18,970  15,168.25  Manager 1 21,160.87 − 12,520.00  8,640.87  Manager 2 11,405.16 − 9,520  1,885.16  Employee 1  6,713.94 − 6,545  168.94  Employee 2  6,198.00 − 6,020  169.00  Employee 3  5,314.08 − 5,145.00  169.08  Total FBT on attributed benefits  26,201.30  Step 4: Calculate FBT on non-attributed benefits: Unclassified benefits provided to Employees 1, 2 and 3 during the year total $3,840. This is pooled and FBT calculated at 42.86%. FBT on non-attributed benefits  3,840 × 0.4286  1,645.82  ▸ Note: The employee exemption for the provision of unclassified benefits does not apply here as the total taxable value per employee per quarter of all unclassified benefits provided exceeds $300 per quarter and the total taxable value of unclassified benefits provided to all employees in the last four quarters is more than $22,500. See ¶21-555. Step 5: Calculate final FBT liability: FBT on attributed benefits  Calculated in Step 3  26,201.30  Add FBT on non-attributed benefits  Calculated in Step 4  1,645.82 27,847.12  Less FBT paid in first three quarters  (14,860 × 0.4925 × 2) + (14,860 × 0.43)  FBT payment due on 31 May 2020  21,026.90 $6,820.22  As the example illustrates, clear and complete records must be kept in order for the FBT to be calculated correctly. Maintaining the records during the year will save much time at the end of the year when the final calculation must be made and the return filed. Also see Inland Revenue’s “Fringe benefit tax guide” (IR 409). Law: IT07 ss RD 50–RD 52, YA 1, sch 1 pt C  FRINGE BENEFIT TAX AND MOTOR VEHICLES ¶21-170 FBT — motor vehicles and employees A fringe benefit exists where an employee has the benefit of a motor vehicle that is made available for the employee’s private use and the motor vehicle is owned, leased or rented by the person who makes the vehicle available to the employee. A fringe benefit also exists when a vehicle is made available for an employee’s private use and the person who makes the vehicle available to the employee has a  right to use the vehicle under an agreement or arrangement with the employee or an associated person of the employee. This means that “nine-to-five” or business leases are no longer effective for FBT purposes. If the vehicle is provided by another person (a third party) under an arrangement with the employer, it is generally treated as having been provided by the employer. A “motor vehicle”, for the purposes of FBT, has the same meaning as in s 2(1) of the Transport Act 1998 and includes most motor cycles, mopeds, cars, station wagons, vans and light trucks, but does not include any vehicle with a gross laden weight exceeding 3,500 kg. Effectively, this means that an employer making available a motor vehicle with a gross laden weight of less than 3,500 kg, whether it is owned, leased or rented by the employer, for the private use of an employee (including travel between home and work), is liable for FBT. See ¶21-175. Although note that, with effect from 1 April 2017 for the 2017–18 and later income years, the motor vehicle expenditure rules in subpart DE have been extended to allow close companies to use the rules as an alternative to paying FBT on a motor vehicle benefit provided to shareholder-employees. See ¶21-070. Law: IT07 ss CX 2(1)(b)(i), (2), CX 6(1), YA 1  ¶21-175 Fringe benefit — availability for private use of vehicle A fringe benefit arises if a vehicle is made available to an employee for their private use. The issue of whether a vehicle is “available” for private use has been discussed in decisions of the Taxation Review Authority. In both Case S26 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,182 and Case T38 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,255 (confirmed on appeal in C of IR v Yes Accounting Services Ltd (1999) 19 NZTC 15,296), the Authority concluded that a vehicle cannot be available for private use if the employee is forbidden to so use it and does not, in fact, use it. Example 1:  Two company cars were used by the husband and wife shareholder-employees who had a home office in addition to factory premises. The cars had to be kept at home for insurance purposes. The husband and wife had no private car of their own, so they used the company vehicles as and when necessary for private transport. The Taxation Review Authority held that FBT was payable in respect of both vehicles because they were available at all times for private use. See Case R37 (1994) 16 NZTC 6,208.  Example 2: The sole shareholder-employee of a company entered into a lease agreement in which the car he owned was leased to the company. He argued that the company was entitled to use the car only during the hours specified in the lease (ie business hours). The shareholder’s private use of the car outside those hours was, he submitted, in his capacity as owner of the car and not as employee of the company. The Taxation Review Authority rejected the argument and held that the car was, in fact, available for the shareholder-employee’s private use, so the company was liable for FBT. See Case T39 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,261.  Interpretation statement on motor vehicles In Interpretation Statement IS 17/07: “Fringe benefit tax — motor vehicles”, August 2017 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 9, October 2017 at 12), the Inland Revenue states that a motor vehicle is made available when an employer provides access to the vehicle and the employee has permission to use it. A motor vehicle is not available to a particular employee if it is being used by another person or if the employer has not supplied the means to operate it (for example, the employee does not have the keys to the vehicle). Example 3: An IT Industry Conference is being held in Sydney. Company X decides to send two shareholder-employees, Chris and Veri, to the conference. Chris drives them both to the airport and parks his car there. They leave on Tuesday, the day before the conference. They attend the conference on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, before departing late Friday night and returning to New Zealand early Saturday morning. As Company X has required Chris to attend the business-related conference, the company has withdrawn Chris’s access to the vehicle for the three full days that Chris and Veri are in Sydney. Company X will still need to account for FBT on Tuesday (the day of departure) and on Saturday (the day Chris and Veri arrive back in New Zealand). This is because Chris still has access and permission to use the vehicle on Tuesday and Saturday (he is not subject to a private use restriction). Therefore, only the three intervening days (Wednesday, Thursday and Friday) are exempt from FBT.  Example adapted from Interpretation Statement IS 17/07: “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles”.  Inland Revenue’s view on restricted private use by shareholderemployees is set out at ¶21-245. The existence of a fringe benefit in the form of the availability for private use of a motor vehicle is determined on a daily basis. See Case P26 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,196 and ¶21-255. If at any time during a day a vehicle is available, the fringe benefit exists for that day (subject to exemptions). The value of the benefit is then calculated, based on the number of days during the quarter for which the fringe benefit arose. When a vehicle is used by or available to more than one employee on any day, there is only one fringe benefit in respect of that day. There are three exclusions from the private use or enjoyment provision. These are work-related use (see ¶21-180), emergency calls (see ¶21-230) and regular business trips (see ¶21-240). Note that with effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, a fourth exclusion applies for motor vehicle benefits provided by close companies to shareholder-employees where the close company has elected to apply the motor vehicle expenditure rules in subpart DE instead of the FBT rules. See ¶21-070. COVID-19 - Commissioner’s view on private use during lockdown In April 2020, the Commissioner stated that her current stance was that the lockdown during alert level 4 in response to COVID-19 would generally not relieve taxpayers from paying FBT on motor vehicles for that period. While movements were severely restricted during the lockdown, an FBT liability still arises if the motor vehicle was available for private use – actual use does not matter. Note that this issue is currently being considered by policy officials. Travel between home and work Interpretation statement, IS3448, “Travel by motor vehicle between home and work — deductibility of expenditure and FBT implications”  sets out the criteria the Commissioner considers relevant in determining whether travel between home and work is work-related or business travel for deductibility purposes and for FBT purposes. Below is a discussion of the FBT aspects of the statement. For discussion of the deductibility aspects, see ¶10-710. Briefly, the Commissioner’s views are: ▪ For FBT purposes, travel will be work-related if: □ the private benefit received is incidental, or □ the private travel is a minor or insignificant proportion of the journey undertaken solely for work-related purposes. ▪ A motor vehicle provided by an employer for travel from one workplace to another in the course of performing employment duties will be work-related, even if one of the workplaces is also home. ▪ Travel from home to work to enable the employee to start work or from work to home is private use. ▪ There will be no fringe benefit unless a private benefit is provided. ▪ No private benefit arises from travel between home and work if the home is also used as a workplace. ▪ In determining whether or not a home is a workplace, the court has considered the following factors (see C of IR v Schick (1998) 18 NZTC 13,738): □ whether there are sound business reasons for operating from home □ whether significant business activity actually occurs at home □ whether there is significant storage of business goods or equipment at home  □ whether significant space is set aside and used for business-related activities conducted at home, and □ whether the activities conducted at the home are closely integrated with the taxpayer’s business. The Commissioner considers that these factors alone are not determinative. The nature of the work or employee’s duties must require that work is performed partly from home (this is an objective test). If the work is performed from home because of the employee’s personal circumstances or choice, the home will not be considered as a workplace and FBT will be payable on travel from home to work and vice versa. It will not be sufficient that the employer and employee have contracted on the basis that employment duties will be partly performed from the employee’s home. ▪ Generally, if an arrangement is made for an employee to perform employment duties partly at the employee’s home solely because of the employee’s personal circumstances, such an arrangement merely recognises the employee’s personal circumstances and is not required by the nature of the employment duties. ▪ Travel between a workplace at home and another workplace will be work-related travel only if the two workplaces relate to the same income-earning activity. ▪ The fact that a vehicle is taken to an employee’s home for security reasons does not in itself make the journey work-related travel. However, this factor may be taken into account with other factors. The statement is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 10, November 2004 at 31. Operational statement on employer-provided travel  In December 2019, Inland Revenue released operational statement OS 19/05, “Employer-provided travel from home to a distant workplace – income tax (PAYE) and fringe benefit tax”, which clarifies and simplifies the tax rules for employer-related travel to distant workplaces. This statement is discussed at ¶10-710 and ¶21-644. Law: IT07 ss CX 6(1), CX 8, CX 17(4B)–(4D), CX 36  ¶21-180 Fringe benefit exclusion — work-related vehicle If for any day a “motor vehicle” qualifies as a “work-related vehicle”, there is no fringe benefit in respect of the vehicle for that day. A motor vehicle is a work-related vehicle on a particular day if it is not a car and has prominently and permanently displayed on the outside of the vehicle, the employer’s identification that is regularly used in carrying on the employer’s activity. If the vehicle is rented, the regular identification of either the employer or the person from whom the vehicle is rented may be displayed. A vehicle complying with these requirements is exempt as a work-related vehicle on any day on which the only private use (if any) obtained by an employee is in the form of travel to or from home that is necessary, and is a condition of, employment or other travel in the course of employment conferring only an incidental private benefit. Each exempt day is reflected in a reduction of the value of the fringe benefit attributable to the vehicle for the tax period in which that day falls. Example 1: An employee has the use of a work-related vehicle from Monday to Friday, during which she may use the vehicle only for business-related travel. She has a letter from her employer to that effect. At weekends, she is allowed to use the vehicle for her private use. The employer is entitled to a partial exemption from FBT for those days on which the vehicle is not available for private use.  Whether a vehicle is a “car” available for private use will depend on the facts of the relevant case.  Definition of “car” A car is a motor vehicle designed exclusively or mainly to carry people and includes a motor vehicle that has rear doors or collapsible rear seats. A car does not include a minibus, moped, motor cycle or taxicab. If, however, a vehicle originally designed for passengers has been substantially altered so that it can no longer be used for the carriage of passengers, it would no longer be considered to be designed exclusively or mainly to carry people. If the seats in the motorcar have been permanently removed (or welded down), Inland Revenue (IR) may accept that the vehicle is a work-related vehicle. Example 2: The vehicles in question were station wagons driven by Tisco service personnel to their homes at night and back to their employer’s premises in the morning. The Commissioner regarded the station wagons as motorcars within the definition of s 336N of the Income Tax Act 1976 (the FBT rules) and assessed them for FBT. The High Court held that the wagons were not motorcars within the meaning of the FBT legislation because they were not designed exclusively or principally for the carriage of persons. They were designed to carry goods as well. If the vehicle is designed equally for two purposes, neither one can be called the “principal” purpose. Barke J was at pains, however, to point out that the decision was based purely on the facts about this particular model of station wagon and that each case would be treated solely on its evidence. See Tisco Ltd v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,049.  Example 3: Hatchback cars originally designed for passengers which were modified with a fitted plywood floor and company logo painted on the side were held to be work-related vehicles in C of IR v Rag Doll Fashions (NZ) Ltd (1995) 17 NZTC 12,104. The Commissioner originally appealed this decision but later withdrew the appeal. In Tax Information Bulletin ¶713-109 Vol 7, No 13, May 1996 at 19, the Commissioner states that the withdrawal of the appeal is not to be taken as IR’s acceptance that design alterations of such a (temporary) nature are sufficient to satisfy the work-related vehicle test. IR’s policy remains that alterations to the design of a car must be permanent in nature to satisfy the work-related vehicle test.  Employer’s name affixed to vehicle  The employer’s name must be prominently displayed by some permanent means on the outside of the vehicle (magnetic or removable signs are not sufficient; therefore, the displaying of the name on the cover over the spare tyre of a four-wheel-drive vehicle is insufficient). If the vehicle is leased, the name displayed may be that of the employer or the lessor. In either case, it is sufficient if a business logo, acronym or other similar identification is shown instead of a name. Example 4: A taxpayer operated a fleet of limousines available for public hire. His business card was displayed inside the windscreen of each vehicle, attached to the Ministry of Transport vehicle authority. The vehicle authority was a permanent sticker also showing the name of the business. The limousines were found to be not work-related vehicles. The notices, whether considered individually or collectively, had not been displayed prominently on the exterior of the vehicles. See Case J50 (1987) 9 NZTC 1,281. Example adapted from Interpretation Statement IS 17/07: “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles”.  Records required When an employer claims that a motor vehicle is a work-related vehicle, Inland Revenue requires that certain records be kept (see IR 409 at 17). These records include: a copy of advice to the employee stating that the vehicle is not available for any private use other than travel to or from home as a condition of employment or other private use that may arise incidentally during the course of employment; a record of periodic checks undertaken by the employer that the vehicle is not used privately by the employee; and a description of the vehicle to establish that it is a work-related vehicle. Law: IT07 ss CX 6(2), CX 38, YA 1  ¶21-230 Fringe benefit exclusion — emergency calls The second situation where the value of a fringe benefit can be reduced (where the vehicle is available for private use) is where the  motor vehicle that would otherwise give rise to a fringe benefit is used by an employee on an “emergency call”. The day on which the employee departs from home on such a call is an exempt day. An emergency call is a visit required to be made by the employee from home in the course of employment to provide services that are: ▪ essential to the operation of any plant or machinery of the employer or any client or customer of the employer ▪ essential to the maintenance of any service provided by any public or local authority or by any person whose business comprises supplying energy or fuel to the public, or ▪ emergency services relating to the health or safety of any person and are called at the request of the employer, client or customer, or member of the public. Except in the case of emergency services relating to the health or safety of a person, the services must be performed by the employee between 6 pm and 6 am during the working week, or at any time during a Saturday, Sunday or a statutory public holiday. There is no restriction on the type of vehicle that may be involved. Example: Jobs R US Ltd (a recruitment company) is a client of Cross Wires Limited (CWL). Jobs R US has decided to update its computer terminals. Chris, an employee of CWL, has agreed to come in after hours and replace the terminals and run a software update. His visit is scheduled for 11pm on Tuesday evening when the recruitment staff have left for the day. The timing of the update is to ensure minimal disruption to the recruitment company’s business. Chris travels from home to the offices of Jobs R US Ltd. Chris finishes up around 5am. He stays around afterwards to talk to the Jobs R US Ltd business development manager about selling the company some new accounting software. He leaves the Jobs R US Ltd offices at 9am. Chris’s visit qualifies for the emergency call exemption because: ▪ the visit was something requested by Jobs R US and Chris made the visit in his vehicle from his home to the client site ▪ the principal purpose of the visit was to undertake essential information technology services in relation to the operation of the client’s plant and  machinery, namely the computers that the client uses to undertake its business (the client could not undertake its business without the computers), and ▪ the essential services were carried out on a week day between 11pm and 5am. It is irrelevant that Chris stayed on after he finished performing the essential services to discuss the sale of new accounting software with the business development manager. It is not necessary for the employee to depart the workplace after the purpose of the visit has been fulfilled. This does not prevent the exemption from applying. Example adapted from Interpretation Statement IS 17/07: “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles”.  Records kept for emergency calls When an employer claims relief in respect of an emergency call, Inland Revenue requires that certain records be kept, these being the name of the employee and the registration number of the vehicle concerned, the time, date and recipient of the call, and details of the purpose and place of the call. Law: IT07 ss CX 6(3), CX 34  ¶21-240 Fringe benefit exclusion — regular business trips Regular business trips are the third situation where the taxable value of a motor vehicle fringe benefit may be reduced. If an employee is regularly required to be absent from home on business and is required by his or her employer to use a motor vehicle in the course of employment, any day on which the employee is so absent from home and so uses the vehicle does not count as a day on which the motor vehicle is available for private use, provided the total period of absence is at least 24 continuous hours. If the total absence is for at least 24 continuous hours, the day of departure from home and the day of arrival back home may both qualify as exempt days, provided on both those days the employee actually used the car for working purposes connected with the trip.  Inland Revenue consider that for this exemption to apply the employee must be absent “with” the vehicle. If the vehicle is parked at an airport while the employee travels by plane, the exemption will generally not apply (see Interpretation Statement IS 17/07, “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 9, October 2017 at 12) and the following examples). Example 1: Chris is an employee of Cross Wires Limited (CWL). Chris has a company vehicle that he can use privately. Chris needs to visit some clients in Napier to help install new equipment and to investigate new business opportunities. He decides to make the four-hour journey in his company vehicle. He is in Napier for three days. Does Chris’s visit qualify for the business travel exemption? Yes. Chris is absent from home with the vehicle for more than 24 hours. In the performance of his employment duties, he is regularly required to use a vehicle and is regularly required to be absent from home.  Example 2: Following on from Example 1 above, instead of travelling by car to Napier, CWL has Chris fly so he can maximise his time in Napier and visit some additional clients. He parks his company vehicle at the airport and makes the journey by plane. Can CWL take advantage of the business travel exemption? No. CWL cannot take advantage of the business travel exemption because Chris is not “with” the vehicle while he is absent from home. Because the business travel exemption cannot apply, whether a vehicle is subject to FBT on a day that the vehicle is parked at an airport must be determined according to whether the employer has made the vehicle available to an employee for their private use on that day. In this example, CWL has effectively removed Chris’s access to the vehicle by requiring him to fly to Napier on business. This means that CWL is no longer making the vehicle available to Chris for his private use. CWL still needs to account for FBT on the day of departure and the day of return, as Chris’s vehicle is not subject to a private use restriction. This means the vehicle is still made available to Chris for his private use on the day of departure and the day of return. Only day two is therefore exempt from FBT. Examples adapted from Interpretation Statement IS 17/07: “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles”.  Records required for absence on business  Inland Revenue requires sufficient records to be kept so that the days that a motor vehicle is not available due to business trips can be justified. Records may include the name of the employee and the registration number of the vehicle concerned, times and dates of departure and arrival home, details of the nature and purpose of the trip and the number of days of business and non-business use in each period of absence. Hotel and other travel receipts may also be kept. Law: IT07 s CX 6(4), (5)  ¶21-245 Fringe benefits — shareholder-employee and motor vehicle A fringe benefit arises when a motor vehicle is made available by an employer to a shareholder-employee for their private use. FBT will not apply if the employer elects to treat the benefit as a dividend: s CX 17(2) and see ¶21-070. With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, FBT will also not apply to motor vehicle benefits provided by close companies to shareholder-employees where the close company has elected to apply the motor vehicle expenditure rules in subpart DE instead of the FBT rules: s CX 17(4B) and see ¶21-070. Restricted private use In Interpretation Statement IS 17/07, “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 9, October 2017 at 12), Inland Revenue has stated that the following will be evidence in support of a claim that a shareholder employee has restricted private use of a company-owned motor vehicle: ▪ Evidence relating to the company’s intentions as to what the vehicle would be available for (for example, letters from directors or evidence of the anticipated business use). ▪ Evidence concerning the actual use of the vehicle, including log books and taxpayer statements.  ▪ Evidence that the shareholder-employees have access to an alternate vehicle for private use. Example: Veri is a shareholder-employee and managing director of Cross Wires Limited (“CWL”). Veri has a luxury company vehicle but she is restricted from using it privately. CWL ensures that Veri’s luxury vehicle is not available for private use by having Chris, as Director of CWL, write a letter to Veri prohibiting her from using any of CWL’s vehicles for private use. The letter also notes that Veri’s luxury vehicle is required to be garaged on CWL’s premises each night and cannot be taken home. The letter also observes that Veri lives in the city, has her own motorbike and private car and does not need another vehicle for private purposes. A copy of this letter is kept on file. Example adapted from Interpretation Statement IS 17/07, “Fringe Benefit Tax — Motor Vehicles”.  Law: IT07 ss CX 6(1), (2B), CX 7, CX 17, DB 56  ¶21-250 Fringe benefits — value of motor vehicle benefits The value of the private use or the availability for private use of a motor vehicle is calculated on either the cost price or tax value of the vehicle. Briefly, if the vehicle provided is owned by the person, the value of the benefit is calculated on the cost price or tax value of the vehicle to the person. If the vehicle provided is leased or rented by the person, the value of the benefit is calculated on the cost price or tax value of the vehicle to the owner (ie the lessor). Cost price or tax value The choice of using either cost price or tax value is made in the first FBT return for the vehicle. Once the choice is made, the employer must use the same method until the vehicle is disposed of, the vehicle ceases to be leased, or five years have passed since the beginning of the period of the vehicle’s first FBT return, whichever is the earlier. This means that the employer is locked into using either cost price or tax value for at least five years. A change to the calculation basis cannot be made until this time period has passed.  Goods and services tax As a general rule, the value of the fringe benefit must be calculated on a GST-inclusive figure. See ¶21-115. However, for those who have kept records on a GST-exclusive basis, sch 5 provides an option to base the calculation of the value of the benefit on either 5% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 5.75% of the GST-exclusive cost price. If the tax value basis is used, the value of the benefit is calculated on either 9% of the GST-inclusive tax value or 10.35% of the GST-exclusive tax value. Elections can be made on a vehicle-byvehicle basis. Where FBT is payable on an annual basis, the option is 20% pa on the GST-inclusive cost price or 23.00% on the GSTexclusive cost price. If the tax value basis is used, the value of the benefit is calculated on either 36% of the GST-inclusive tax value or 41.40% of the GST-exclusive tax value. Test period Employers may calculate FBT in respect of motor vehicles on the basis of a sample three-month test period. The results from the test period will be able to be used to calculate the number of days upon which the vehicle is available for private use, by contrast to being deemed to be only available for work use. The test period results form a basis for calculating FBT for a three-year period before a further test has to be undertaken. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 12, May 1995 at 12. Law: IT07 ss RD 28, RD 31, sch 5  ¶21-255 Fringe benefits — calculating value of motor vehicle — vehicle owned Three bases exist for determining the taxable value of a motor vehicle where the vehicle is owned by the person making it available for private use. Quarterly basis To work out the taxable value of the fringe benefit for quarterly filers, the following formula is used:  days × schedule 5 amount ÷ 90 where: days is the lesser of 90 and the number of days (including part of a day) during the quarter in which the vehicle was made available for private use by the employee (see further below), and schedule 5 amount is the amount calculated under sch 5 cl 1(a) of the Act, being 5% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 9% of the GST-inclusive tax value of the vehicle (or 5.75% of the GSTexclusive cost price or 10.35% of the GST-exclusive tax value). “Cost price” is discussed below. In calculating “days”, the number of days that: ▪ there was no availability for private use by an employee ▪ the vehicle was used for an emergency call ▪ the vehicle was used on a business trip away from the employee’s home, or ▪ the vehicle was used as a work-related vehicle must be subtracted from the number of days in the quarter. Simply stating 90 days for each quarter in this part of the formula is a common error. Example: During the quarter ending 31 March 2019, Mr TP had one of his employer’s motor vehicles available for private use. The vehicle cost $28,500 (GST-inclusive) of which Mr TP paid $5,000. During the quarter, the vehicle was in the workshop for one week, was used to make two emergency calls and was taken away on a sales trip for 10 days. Mr TP made a contribution of $20 per week to the private running costs. Mr TP’s employer uses the cost price basis to calculate FBT on the vehicle and chooses to pay FBT in this quarter at 49.25%. The number of days a fringe benefit was conferred is: Days of the quarter  90  less no availability for private use  7  less emergency calls  2  less business trip days  10  19 71  The gross value of the benefit is calculated as follows: 71 days/90 days × $28,500 × 5% = $1,124 That value must then be adjusted for Mr TP’s contributions and ownership reduction as follows (see ¶21-280): $ Quarterly taxable value  $ 1,124  less contributions (12 wks × $20)  240  less ownership reductions ($5,000 × 0.025)  125  Net quarterly taxable value  365 759  The fringe benefit tax payable for the quarter is 49.25% of the net quarterly taxable value, being: $759 × 49.25% = $373.81  Annual basis Employers who file FBT returns on an annual basis will need to determine the annual value of the fringe benefit by applying the quarterly formula provided as above to each of the four quarters and adding these together to arrive at the annual value. Income-year basis For employers who file FBT returns on an income-year basis, the taxable value will be calculated over the entire year rather than as a total of four quarters. This is done through the application of the formula: days × schedule 5 amount ÷ 365 where:  days is the number of days in the income year in which the vehicle is available for private use reduced by the number of days in which the motor vehicle is a work-related vehicle, and schedule 5 amount is the amount calculated under sch 5 cl 1(a), being 20% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 23% of the GSTexclusive cost price or 36% of the GST-inclusive tax value or 41.40% of the GST-exclusive tax value of the motor vehicle. Cost price “Cost price” is not defined in the legislation for the purposes of FBT. Public binding ruling BR Pub 09/08, “‘Cost price of the vehicle’ — meaning of the term for fringe benefit tax purposes”, published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 1, September 2010 at 3, states that the cost price of a motor vehicle includes: ▪ the purchase price of the vehicle ▪ the cost of the initial registration and licence plate fees ▪ the cost of accessories, components and equipment (other than “business accessories”) fitted to the vehicle at the time of purchase or at any time thereafter ▪ the cost (if any), including freight insurance costs and any customs duty, of transporting the motor vehicle to the place where it is to be first used. All costs include GST. Inland Revenue further considers that the cost price does not include the following: ▪ annual vehicle re-licensing fees ▪ road user charges ▪ sign-writing the vehicle in the employer’s colours or style (in physical terms, the addition of paint or other graphics such as magnetic signs, decals or transfers)  ▪ “business accessories” fitted to the motor vehicle at the time of purchase or at any time thereafter, and ▪ financing the purchase of the vehicle. The term “business accessories” means accessories, components and equipment fitted to the vehicle, required for and relating solely to the business operations for which the vehicle is used. These items must also be in themselves “depreciable property” for tax purposes. If the “business accessories” are powered, the definition states that they will usually require the vehicle’s power source to operate them. The phrase “fitted to the vehicle” is defined in the ruling as permanently affixed to the vehicle. However, the accessory will still be “fitted to the vehicle” if it is temporarily removed for repair or maintenance, or removed on sale or disposal of the vehicle or the accessory itself. The ruling applies for an indefinite period from 1 November 2008. Tax value A motor vehicle’s tax value is the value of the vehicle in a quarter or tax year or income year as determined under the depreciation rules for the beginning of the tax year or income year. However, if the vehicle is acquired after the beginning of the tax year or income year, the vehicle’s tax value is its cost. Note that special rules apply if the vehicle has previously been owned by the employer or an associated person within two years of its reacquisition. If the tax value method is adopted, employers should be aware that there is a minimum tax value for the vehicle of $8,333. This means that the FBT value of a motor vehicle provided to an employee must be calculated on $8,333 when the actual tax value (as determined under the depreciation rules) falls below that threshold. Start time of day When calculating the FBT value of making a vehicle available to an employee for the employee’s private use, the employer may choose  the start time of the FBT day. If no election for a specific start time is made, the FBT day is a 24-hour period starting at midnight. The alternative start time must be a whole number of hours after midnight. The Commissioner must be notified of the election when the next FBT return for the vehicle is provided. The election is effective from the start of the quarter, income year or tax year to which the return relates and will apply to all motor vehicles provided to employees that are subject to FBT. Any election made will apply for a minimum period of two income years. An application may be made to amend the start time of an FBT day or to revoke any previous election made if the employer’s circumstances have changed. The extent of the change must be more than minor and make the previously elected start time no longer relevant to the employer’s business. Law: IT07 ss RD 29, RD 30, sch 5  ¶21-260 Fringe benefits — calculating value of motor vehicle — vehicle rented or leased Where a motor vehicle is leased or rented by the employer, the value is calculated as follows: Quarterly basis The formula that applies to owners of motor vehicles (see ¶21-255 under the heading “Quarterly basis”) also applies if a vehicle is leased or rented by the employer. The exception is that the “schedule 5 amount” in the formula for each quarter is 5% of the owner’s (ie the lessor’s) GST-inclusive cost price of the vehicle at the time the vehicle is provided to the employee. If the tax value method is used, the FBT value for each quarter is 9% of the owner’s GSTinclusive tax value of the vehicle at the time the vehicle is provided to the employee. Annual basis If FBT is paid on an annual basis, the value of the benefit is the total of the amounts calculated for the four quarters in the applicable tax  year. Income-year basis If FBT is paid on an income-year basis, the formula that applies to employers who own the motor vehicle (see ¶21-255 under the heading “Income-year basis”) also applies where the motor vehicle is rented or leased. The exception is that the “schedule 5 amount” is 20% of the owner’s (rather than the employer’s) GST-inclusive cost price or 36% of the tax value. Cost price The cost price of a leased or rented vehicle that has previously been leased or rented to another person (not being the employer) is the vehicle’s market value provided all of the parties are not associated. More specifically, the employer and the previous lessee cannot be associated, nor can the employer or employee and the lessor or owner be associated. Further, the employee cannot be the lessor or owner of the vehicle. Lessor requirements If requested, the lessor must provide the lessor’s cost price or tax value of the vehicle leased or rented to the lessee (employer). Law: IT07 ss RD 28, RD 29, sch 5  ¶21-265 Fringe benefits — Commissioner determining cost of vehicle In certain circumstances, the Commissioner is authorised to determine the vehicle’s cost price. The Commissioner may do this in circumstances where the vehicle was acquired by the employer at no cost, the vehicle was acquired at less than its current market value because of an arrangement between the employer and an associated person to defeat the intent and application of the fringe benefit tax provisions, or the cost price cannot be established by the employer to the satisfaction of the Commissioner. In any of these situations, the Commissioner may determine that the cost price of the vehicle is the vehicle’s current market value on the date of  acquisition by the employer. The Commissioner’s power is subject to the rules relating to sale and buy back agreements. See ¶21-275. Law: IT07 s GB 31(4), sch 5 cl 8  ¶21-270 Fringe benefits — value of pooled vehicles Where a pool of vehicles is available to an employee for private use, the “schedule 5 amount” factor in the formula for calculating the value of the benefit (see ¶21-255) will be: ▪ if the employee primarily uses one particular vehicle, 5% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 9% of the GST-inclusive tax value of that vehicle in each quarter or 20% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 36% of the GST-inclusive tax value in respect of a vehicle in a tax year or an income-year basis ▪ if the employer does not primarily use one particular vehicle, is employed in the business of selling cars and the only vehicles available for use are trading stock, 5% of the average GSTinclusive cost price or 9% of the average GST-inclusive tax value of the vehicles available for the employee’s use on a quarterly basis, or 20% of the average GST-inclusive cost price or 36% of the average GST-inclusive tax value on an incomeyear or tax year basis ▪ if neither of the above applies, 5% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 9% of the GST-inclusive tax value of the highest value of the vehicles used by the employee or 20% of the GST-inclusive cost price or 36% of the GST-inclusive tax value of the highest value vehicle on a tax year or an income-year basis. For the “schedule 5 amount” part of the formula where the amount is GST-exclusive, see ¶21-250. Example: Company TP has a pool of five vehicles, four of which are used by the employees for private purposes. The cost price of these vehicles are: $17,000, $20,000, $25,000 and  $28,000. The managing director, who is also a controlling shareholder, has the sole use of a motor vehicle with a cost price of $60,000. Assume the value of the benefit is calculated using the cost price of the vehicle and FBT is paid at 49.25%. FBT is payable as follows: Pool vehicles used by all employees Number of days available for private use = 75 5% (in the case of a quarter’s calculation) of the highest cost price of the vehicle in the pool = $28,000 × 5% = $1,400 75 ÷ 90 × $1,400 = $1,167 × 4 (no of vehicles) = $4,668 Pool vehicles used only by one employee Number of days available for private use = 90 5% (on a quarterly basis) of the cost price of that motor vehicle: $60,000 × 5% = $3,000 90 ÷ 90 × $3,000 = $3,000 FBT of $3,776.49 is payable, ie 49.25% of $7,668 ($4,668 + $3,000).  The divisor “90” is used where FBT is returned on a quarterly basis. If returning FBT on an income-year basis, the divisor is 365. Fringe benefit tax returned on an annual basis is calculated by adding the four quarterly amounts for the quarterly periods that fall within the relevant year. Law: IT07 sch 5 cl 2  ¶21-275 FBT — sale and buy back arrangements of vehicles There are specific provisions to stop sale and buy back arrangements. These arrangements involve the sale and immediate repurchase of a motor vehicle with the objective of reducing the cost price on which the tax is calculated. Where a person acquires a motor vehicle and (within the previous two years ending on the day before the acquisition) the car has been owned by the employer or an associated person of the employer, the cost price of the car for FBT purposes is deemed to be the highest price at which, subsequent to manufacture, it has been acquired by the employer or the associated person. The effect is that the original purchase price  remains the car’s cost price when calculating FBT. Any subsequent purchase is disregarded. Example: Mr Swifty purchased a car for $80,000 on 1 October 2019. He sold it to his son, Swifty Jnr, on 3 April 2020 for $59,200, and bought it back again for $54,000 on 10 April 2020. He recorded the cost price of the car in his company books at $54,000. The cost price is to be the highest cost price to Mr Swifty, or Swifty Jnr, at any time since the car’s manufacture. In this case, it is $80,000. FBT must therefore be calculated at this price, and not the lower price of $54,000.  Inland Revenue released “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 10/03: “Fringe benefit tax — value of motor vehicle previously owned by the employer or by an associated person of the employer”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 5, June 2010 at 52. Briefly, the item provides that the appropriate starting point to value a vehicle for FBT purposes where (within the last two years) the motor vehicle was previously owned by the employer or an associated person will be: ▪ if the cost price method is used, the highest cost paid for the vehicle by the employer or associated person on any acquisition ▪ if the tax value method is used, determined by sch 5 cl 4. More information on the application of cl 4 is in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 80. See also ¶21-060 regarding the wider application of s GB 31 and ¶21-130 regarding the application of s GA 2. These are antiavoidance provisions dealing with arrangements affecting FBT. Law: IT07 s GB 31(4), sch 5 cl 8  ¶21-280 Fringe benefits — employee contribution and part-ownership of vehicle Employee contribution  Where an employee receiving a fringe benefit makes a payment towards it, the taxable value is reduced by the lesser of the taxable value of the benefit and the amount paid. This is to ensure that a negative value does not arise. Part-ownership by employee Where vehicles are part-owned by an employee or an associated person and the employer has not valued the motor vehicle on a GST-exclusive basis, the reduction in taxable value is 2.5% per quarter or 10% per income year of the cost price (determined on a GST-inclusive basis). If an employee or associate is a part-owner of the vehicle and the employer has valued the motor vehicle on a GST-exclusive basis, the reduction in taxable value, calculated exclusive of GST, is: ▪ when FBT is paid quarterly: 2.5 + (2.5 × schedule 5 rate) ▪ when FBT is paid on an annual basis: 2.5 + (2.5 × schedule 5 rate) ▪ when FBT is paid on an income year basis: 10 + (10 × schedule 5 rate) Adjustment for period shorter or longer than year Various adjustments can be made to calculate the amount of taxable fringe benefit where an employer who returns FBT on an incomeyear basis has an FBT period shorter than or longer than a normal income year because the employer is ceasing or commencing business or the employer is changing balance date. In these cases, the taxable value of the fringe benefit of a motor vehicle is reduced by: 10% × number of days in period ÷ 365  Example 1: Employer Co Ltd pays FBT on an income-year basis. It has received written approval from Inland Revenue to change its balance date from 31 March to 30 June. The first year of application is the 2019–20 income year; therefore, the income year ended 31 March 2020 will be a 15-month period from 1 April 2019 to