 relating to strategic or otherwise significant decisions in the limited partnership (eg varying the partnership agreement), and ▪ actions taken in a different capacity (eg acting in the capacity of a director or shareholder of a general partner that is a body corporate). Limited partnership agreement A limited partnership must have a written partnership agreement that governs the affairs of the partnership and the conduct of its business. On registration of the partnership with the Registrar of Companies, the agreement acts as a contract between the limited partnership and the partners. The Limited Partnerships Act lists out matters that are required in the agreement. Law: LP ss 8–11, 18–20, 26, 47, sch 1  ¶23-025 Overseas limited partnerships An overseas limited partnership is defined in s 4 of the Limited Partnerships Act 2008 as a partnership formed or incorporated outside New Zealand: ▪ with one or more general partners who are liable for all the debts and liabilities of the partnership, and ▪ with one or more limited partners who have only limited liability for the debts and liabilities of the partnership. An overseas limited partnership that commences business in New Zealand must apply for registration within 10 working days of  commencing that business. Carrying on business in New Zealand includes administering, managing or dealing with property in New Zealand as an agent, personal representative or trustee. Certain activities do not constitute carrying on business in New Zealand. These include being a party to legal proceedings in New Zealand, holding a meeting of partners in New Zealand or maintaining a New Zealand bank account. Law: LP ss 4, 104–114  TAXATION OF GENERAL AND LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS ¶23-030 Introduction to taxation of partnerships Specific rules for partnerships were enacted in an attempt to codify and clarify the tax treatment of both general and limited partnerships. Generally, both limited and general partnerships are taxed in the same manner under the Income Tax Act. However, some additional tax rules apply to limited partnerships: ▪ a loss limitation rule applies to restrict losses claimed by limited partners to the value of their economic investment in the partnership (see ¶23-080), and ▪ a general partner will always be associated with the partnership under the associated persons test in s YB 12. However, for limited partners, a 25% interest threshold must be met before the limited partner and the partnership will be associated. The definition of “partnership” also includes joint ventures and coowners of property if all the joint venturers or co-owners elect to be treated as a partnership for the purposes of the Income Tax Act and the Tax Administration Act 1994. Therefore, the tax rules for partnerships may also apply to joint ventures and co-owners of property. Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶23-035 Structure of the legislation  Subpart HG to the Income Tax Act 2007 contains the tax rules relating to joint venturers, partners and partnerships. In addition to the rules in subpart HG, the following key provisions are also relevant: ▪ s CB 35 — Amounts of income for partners ▪ s CW 55B — Amounts of exempt income for partners ▪ s CX 62 — Amounts of excluded income for partners ▪ s DV 20 — Partners (deductions) ▪ s GB 50 — Arrangements involving partners ▪ s YB 12 — Partnership and partner (associated persons), and ▪ s YB 14 — Tripartite relationship (associated persons). Law: IT07 subpart HG  ¶23-040 Flow-through tax treatment The general rule is that partnerships are transparent for income tax purposes. Unless there is a specific rule that provides otherwise, a partner in a partnership is to be treated as: ▪ carrying on an activity carried on by the partnership and having a status, intention and purpose of the partnership ▪ holding property that a partnership holds, in proportion to the partner’s partnership share ▪ being a party to an arrangement to which the partnership is a party, in proportion to that partner’s partnership share, and ▪ doing a thing and being entitled to a thing that the partnership does or is entitled to, in proportion to the partner’s partnership share. A natural consequence of the flow-through tax treatment is that partners in the partnership will be taxed on their share of partnership  income at their marginal tax rate. This is advantageous to partners whose marginal rates are lower than the corporate tax rate. There will also be no additional tax to be paid on distribution of partnership income (subject to the loss limitation rule for limited partnerships — see ¶23-080) because partners are deemed to have derived partnership income directly. Thus, capital gains can be distributed to partners tax-free as they are derived (in comparison with a company where capital gains can only be distributed tax-free on liquidation). Any losses incurred by the partnership will be passed through directly to partners. See ¶23-120. No streaming of partnership income The Act provides that all partnership income must be allocated to each partner in accordance with the partner’s “partnership share” in the partnership’s income. Therefore, each source of income derived by the partnership needs to be allocated to each partner on a pro rata basis according to their share in the partnership’s income. “Partnership share” is defined as meaning “for a particular right, obligation or other property, status, or thing, the share that a partner has in the partnership”. This definition is intended to allow situations where a partner’s share in partnership income differs from their share in partnership assets. This is common in professional services partnerships where a partner’s entitlement to income may be decided by considering other factors such as the partner’s individual performance during the year. Question we’ve been asked In November 2017, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/09, “Is there full or partial disposal when an asset is contributed to a partnership as a capital contribution?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 1, February 2018 at 10). The QWBA arose because it had been suggested the flow-through effect of s HG 2(1) means that where a person, in their non-partner capacity, disposes of an asset to a partnership as a capital contribution, the person disposes of only part of the asset. This is because, following the disposal, the person, in their capacity as partner, is treated as holding the asset in proportion to their  partnership share. The Commissioner rejects this view and concludes there is a full disposal of the asset. This is because: ▪ In the absence of any applicable provision in the Income Tax Act, the answer is determined under partnership law and the general law. ▪ Where a person contributes an asset to a general partnership, the legal ownership of the asset and the person’s interest in the asset all fundamentally change. Before disposal, the person is the sole owner of the asset. Following disposal, the asset ceases to be the person’s property. The asset belongs to the partners of the partnership as joint owners and is partnership property. The person and their co-partners each have a beneficial interest in the whole of the asset, and the asset, as partnership property, must be used exclusively for the purposes of the partnership. There has been a disposal of the asset by its sole owner to joint owners. ▪ Where the person contributes the asset to a limited partnership, the person has fully disposed of the asset to a separate legal person, which has not held any previous interest in the asset. This means, for example, that where the asset disposed of is either depreciable property or revenue account property (which includes trading stock) for the person, the person may have an amount of depreciation recovery income or depreciation loss, or income or loss, calculated on the basis that the person has fully disposed of the asset. As the Commissioner has previously accepted both the partial and full disposal approaches, the Commissioner has released the following transitional operational position that she will apply from the date of publication of QB 17/09 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 1, February 2018 at 18): ▪ Where a person has previously applied a partial disposal approach to a particular asset contributed to a partnership, and that asset is still held by the partnership, they can continue to apply that approach to the asset provided that: □ the partial disposal is recorded/noted in the person’s relevant accounts for each year until the asset has been disposed of by  the partnership, and □ the person must account for any applicable tax liabilities on the retained part of the asset when the partnership disposes of the asset. ▪ Where a person has previously applied a full disposal approach to a particular asset already contributed to a partnership, they will continue to apply this approach with no change. ▪ Where a person wants to contribute a new asset to a partnership, they must use the full disposal approach. Law: IT07 ss CB 35, HG 2, YA 1  ¶23-045 Dissolution of a partnership Dissolution of a partnership for tax purposes will only occur when the partnership dissolves by: ▪ agreement of the partners ▪ court order, or ▪ the operation of the law that results in fewer than two partners remaining, and the partnership ceases to carry on business. Where the dissolution rule applies, any consideration received by the partner for the disposal of their interests is ignored for tax purposes and the partner is instead treated as having disposed of and reacquired all of their interests at market value. The partner will be taxed on any resulting gain or loss on any subsequent disposal of their interests. Exclusions The dissolution rule does not apply to an actual disposal of a partnership interest by a partner to a non-associated third party. For these purposes, the partner’s partnership capacity is ignored for testing association. The dissolution rule does not apply if a partnership is a partnership of two persons who are in a married, civil union or de facto relationship,  and the dissolution is caused by the death of one of the partners or relates to the settlement of relationship property. In such cases, any intervening transfer is ignored and the transfer is dealt with in terms of subpart FB or FC. Market value does not apply to these transfers. Law: IT07 s HG 4  ¶23-050 Disposal of partnership interests Under the flow-through provision, each partner is deemed to hold partnership assets directly in proportion to their respective partnership share. Thus, a disposal of an interest in a partnership is treated as a disposal of the partner’s share in the underlying assets of the partnership and the normal tax consequences on the sale of assets will result. However, ss HG 5–HG 10 provide a number of exemptions from the general rule. General de minimis exemption — s HG 5 A general de minimis exemption applies when a partner (referred to as the “exiting partner”) disposes of some or all of their partner’s interests in a partnership. Where the net gain on disposal of the partner’s interest is less than $50,000, the purchaser (or “entering partner”) will “step into the shoes” of the exiting partner. (The entering partner can include a person who is already a partner in the partnership.) The ability to “step into the shoes” of the exiting partner essentially removes any tax consequences to both the entering and exiting partners. Where the net gain is greater than $50,000, the exiting partner must account for tax on the proceeds of disposal. The following formula is used to determine whether the exiting partner must account for tax on disposal of their partner’s interest: disposal payment + previous payments − (gross tax value − liabilities) − $50,000 where, generally: disposal payment is the total consideration paid or payable to the exiting partner for the current interests previous payment is the total consideration paid or payable to the exiting partner for other disposals of the partner’s interests in the  year prior to the disposal of the current interests gross tax value is the total of: (i) the value of the current interests and other interests at the time the relevant interest is disposed of, to the extent that the interests are revenue account property or depreciable property or financial arrangements, and (ii) the market value of the current interests and other interests at the time the relevant interest is disposed of, to the extent that the interests are not revenue account property or depreciable property or financial arrangements liabilities is the amount of any liabilities at the time the interest is disposed of. If the formula produces a result: ▪ less than zero — the disposal payment is excluded income of the exiting partner and the exiting partner is not required to account for tax (see s CX 62) ▪ greater than or equal to zero — the exiting partner is required to account for tax on any gain or loss on disposal of the interest. In Question we’ve been asked, QB 14/02: “Income tax — entry of a new partner into a partnership — effect on continuing partners”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 5, June 2014 at 53, Inland Revenue discusses the tax implications for continuing partners in a partnership when a partner sells their interest in a partnership. Inland Revenue considers that when a new partner simply “steps into the shoes” of an exiting partner and the continuing partners’ interests in the assets of the partnership have not been changed, then no tax consequences should arise. However, there will be a taxable event for continuing partners if the addition of the new partner changes the continuing partners’ interests in the partnership assets. In that case, the provisions of ss HG 5–HG 10 will need to be applied. Specific exemptions  A number of specific exemptions apply to the disposal of certain items of partnership property. Trading stock — s HG 6 An exiting partner will not be required to account for tax on the disposal of trading stock if total turnover of the partnership is $3m or less in the income year of disposal. The entering partner will then step into the shoes of the exiting partner and take on the exiting partner’s cost base for the trading stock. This applies even if the entering partner has paid market value for the stock, which could be more or less than the exiting partner’s cost base. Depreciable property — s HG 7 An exiting partner will also not be required to account for tax on disposal of an item of depreciable property with an original cost of $200,000 or less. The exiting partner will not be entitled to claim any loss on disposal of the asset. The entering partner will not be entitled to any deduction in respect of the purchase price paid (ie the entering partner must take on the exiting partner’s cost base regardless of the price paid). However, the exiting partner will be entitled to a depreciation deduction in relation to the property up until the time of disposal. The entering partner will be entitled to depreciation deductions from the date of disposal. The amount of deduction allocated to each partner depends on their share in partnership’s income. Financial arrangements — s HG 8 An exiting partner will not have to account for tax on the disposal of a partner’s interest to the extent that the interest includes a financial arrangement (or excepted financial arrangement) that satisfies the following criteria: ▪ the financial arrangement (or excepted financial arrangement) was entered into for purposes necessary and incidental to the business of the partnership, and ▪ the partnership does not derive income from a business of holding financial arrangements.  Where these conditions are satisfied, the exiting partner will not be required to perform a base price adjustment on disposal of the financial arrangement. Any consideration received by the exiting partner will be excluded income and the entering partner will not be entitled to any deduction in respect of their purchase price. As with the depreciable property exemption, the entering partner will be treated as stepping into the shoes of the exiting partner from the date of disposal. If the change in partnership interest occurs part way through an income year, an apportionment of income derived from the financial arrangement may be required between the entering and exiting partners in the year of disposal. In this regard it is interesting to note that s HG 8(3) appears to prevent the exiting partner from claiming any deduction in relation to the financial arrangement (ie no apportionment between the entering and exiting partners appears to be contemplated in the case of deductions). In contrast the equivalent section of the depreciable property exemption only prohibits the exiting partner from claiming a deduction to which the entering partner is entitled. Short-term agreements for sale and purchase — s HG 9 Any disposal of a partner’s interests comprising short-term agreements for sale and purchase (generally for property or services under which settlement must take place on or before the 93rd day after the agreement is entered into: see s YA 1) will fall outside the general flowthrough rule. No de minimis threshold applies to such disposals. The entering partner will take on the exiting partner’s cost base for the agreement (regardless of the actual purchase price paid) and will not be entitled to a deduction for the purchase price paid. The exiting partner will not be assessed on income from the sale. Livestock — s HG 10 The disposal of a partner’s interests comprising certain specified livestock falls outside the general flow-through rule where the partners use the national standard cost scheme for specified livestock (see s EC 22) or the cost price method for specified livestock (see s EC 25). Sections HG 10(2) and EC 26B provide that an entering partner may elect to spread any difference between the price they paid for specified livestock and the partnership’s base cost when the partnership has  breeding livestock. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 152. The election is made by the entering partner furnishing a return of income that applies s HG 10: s HG 3(3). Small partnerships — s HG 3(2) Small partnerships can elect to opt out of the specific exemptions from tax on disposal contained in ss HG 5–HG 9. A “small partnership” is defined as “a partnership that is not a limited partnership and has 5 or less partners, none of whom are companies or partnerships”. Where a small partnership chooses to opt out of the disposal safe harbours, the exiting partner is then required to account for tax on the disposal of their partner’s interests. This election can be made by filing a tax return that ignores the effect of the relevant sections. Example: Norah and her five children Sarah, Tommy, Kitty, Kevin and Justin operate a family business — The Walker Family Partnership — that manufactures and sells widgets. Kitty decides to sell her share of the partnership to her Uncle Saul for $195,000. The partnership assets at the time of sale consist of trading stock and a building. Kitty’s gain on the sale of her share is $55,000 calculated as follows: Building  Trading stock  Total  Cost  $900,000  $90,000  $990,000  Tax book value  $750,000  $90,000  $840,000  Market value  $1,050,000  $120,000  $1,170,000  Kitty’s share of cost (1/6th)  $150,000  $15,000  $165,000  Kitty’s sale proceeds  $175,000  $20,000  $195,000  less Kitty’s share of tax book value (1/6th)  $125,000  $15,000  $140,000  Kitty’s gain on sale  $50,000  $5,000  $55,000  Kitty’s taxable gain  $25,000  n/a  $25,000  Kitty’s capital gain  $25,000  n/a  $25,000  In the year of disposal, the partnership’s turnover was $2m.  As Kitty’s gain on disposal of her partner’s interest is greater than $50,000, the general de minimis exemption in s HG 5 will not apply. However, the specific exemptions may still apply and will need to be considered in relation to each type of partnership asset disposed of. As the building has a historical cost of more than $200,000, the depreciable property exemption will not apply. Kitty will therefore be required to pay tax on $25,000 being the taxable gain on sale of the building. Upon Uncle Saul’s entry into the partnership, Uncle Saul’s cost base will equal the portion of the purchase price attributable to the building. As the partnership’s turnover is less than $3m, the trading stock exemption in s HG 6 will apply. This means that Kitty will not be required to account for tax on the disposal of trading stock. Instead, effectively Uncle Saul will step into Kitty’s shoes and acquire Kitty’s interest in the trading stock. However, the effect of this is that Uncle Saul will acquire a cost base equal to Kitty’s cost base in the trading stock even if he has paid a price based on market value that is higher than Kitty’s cost base. This example illustrates that as new partners enter a partnership the cost base of each partner’s interest will change. Each partner may have a different cost base of assets in the partnership, which will not necessarily correlate with their respective partnership shares. It is therefore important to track each partner’s cost base of their partnership assets. Example adapted from PricewaterhouseCoopers 2008 Facts on Tax seminar series.  Law: IT07 ss CX 62, EC 26B, HG 3(2), (3), HG 5–HG 10, YA 1  ¶23-060 Tax administration and filing requirements A partnership is only required to file a partnership return of income if it is a limited partnership registered under the Limited Partnerships Act 2008 or if it carries on business in New Zealand. Regardless of whether a partnership is required to file a partnership return of income, the partnership will not be assessed in its own right. Rather, each partner will file their separate return of income and will be individually assessed on their share of partnership income. If a New Zealand limited partnership is comprised solely of non-resident investors and derives only foreign sourced income, the partnership will be required to file a partnership return of income. However, as the partners are non-residents deriving foreign sourced income, the individual partners will not have any filing requirements. Only a partnership return of income would be required in these cases. Only one set of records is required to be maintained by a partnership relating to all partners and all the firm’s activities. Individual partners are  not required to retain records, if the partnership retains the records for them. Law: TAA ss 22(4), 42  ¶23-070 Avoidance A specific anti-avoidance rule applies for partnerships where a partner of a partnership enters into a transaction for consideration that is greater than or less than market value and that has a purpose or effect of defeating the intent and application of the partnership provisions. Where this section applies, the transaction will be deemed to have taken place at market value. Law: IT07 s GB 50  TAXATION OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS ¶23-080 Loss limitation rule A loss limitation provision applies to limited partners in a limited partnership. It is intended to ensure that tax losses claimed by limited partners reflect the level of the limited partner’s economic loss. General partners, on the other hand, are entitled to a full deduction for their share of partnership tax losses. Under the loss limitation rule, a limited partner’s “limited partnership deduction” is restricted to the tax book value of his or her investment in the limited partnership (referred to in the legislation as the “partner’s basis”). “Limited partnership deduction” is defined as the deduction that a limited partner would otherwise have been allowed for partnership expenditure under the general flow-through provision in s HG 2 or the loss carry-forward rule in s HG 12. A partner’s basis is calculated using the following formula under s HG 11(3): investments − distributions + income − deductions − disallowed amount  where, generally: investments is the market value of capital contributions made by the partner to the limited partnership, including a loan by a limited partner to a limited partnership, along with any guarantees provided by the partner (or an associate of the partner) to the partnership distributions is the market value of distributions to the partner from the partnership income is the partner’s share of total income (including exempt and excluded income, and capital gains and certain FIF income) received from the partnership in the current and preceding tax years deductions is the partner’s share of partnership deductions and capital losses in previous tax years, and disallowed amount is the amount of investments made by the partner within 60 days of the last day of the income year, if those investments are or will be distributed or reduced within 60 days after the last day of the income year. The “disallowed amount” is essentially an anti-avoidance mechanism to exclude any investments made by the partner in the last 60 days of an income year that are subsequently withdrawn within the first 60 days of the following income year. This component of the calculation prevents partners artificially inflating their basis at the end of the income year to increase their allowable partnership tax loss deduction. A limited partner will be entitled to a tax loss deduction for their share of partnership losses up to the value of their “basis”. Any losses exceeding the amount of the basis may be carried forward to future income years. A deduction may be allowed in future income years subject to the general loss limitation rule. Example: The following example illustrates the operation of the loss limitation provision.  Assume the Tom & Jerry Limited Partnership derives business income in year one of $200,000 and incurs allowable deductions of $350,000 (resulting in a tax loss of $150,000 for the year). In year two, the partnership derives business income of $300,000 and incurs allowable deductions of $250,000 (resulting in taxable income of $50,000). Tom invested $60,000 of initial capital for a 50% share in the partnership. Tom’s basis in year one (assuming that no partnership distributions are made during the year) is calculated as follows: Basis  = Investments − Distributions +  $160,000 =  $60,000  −  $0  Income  − Deductions − Disallowed amount  + $100,000 −  $0  −  $0  As Tom’s basis is $160,000, he will only be entitled to claim limited partnership deductions of $160,000. Therefore, in year one Tom will return partnership income of $100,000 and partnership deductions of $160,000 (giving a net partnership loss for the year of $60,000). The remaining $15,000 of Tom’s $175,000 share of partnership losses will be carried forward to year two. In year two, Tom’s basis will be calculated as follows: Basis  = Investments − Distributions +  $150,000 =  $60,000  −  $0  Income  − Deductions − Disallowed amount  + ($100,000 − + $150,000)  $160,000  −  $0  Tom’s limited partnership deduction in year two is $140,000 (being his 50% share of year two deductions of $125,000 plus deductions carried forward from year one of $15,000). As Tom’s basis is $150,000, he will be entitled to claim the full partnership deduction of $140,000. Therefore, in year two Tom will return partnership income of $150,000 and partnership deductions of $140,000, giving Tom net partnership income of $10,000.  Limited partner subsequently becoming a general partner It is possible for a limited partner to become a general partner. To prevent the loss limitation rule being circumvented, the loss limitation rule also applies to general partners who: ▪ were limited partners of the limited partnership within 60 days of the last day of the income year, and ▪ are (or will be) limited partners of the limited partnership within 60 days after the last day of the income year.  Law: IT07 ss HG 11, HG 12  ¶23-085 International issues for limited partnerships Foreign partners of New Zealand limited partnerships Under the flow-through tax treatment provided to partnerships, partners are taxed as if they had derived their share of the partnership’s income directly. The effect of this is that non-resident partners are subject to New Zealand tax only on their New Zealand-sourced income. Certain payments by partnership deemed to have New Zealand source Section YD 4(17B) deems income to have a New Zealand source if, treating all partners of a partnership as New Zealand residents, the income would have had a New Zealand source under another provision of s YD 4. If the deeming provision in s YD 4(17B) does not apply, the other source rules in s YD 4 are unaffected. The deeming provision means that a New Zealand partnership may be required to deduct NRWT from amounts of non-resident passive income, regardless of whether some of the partners making those payments to non-residents are non-residents themselves. Law: IT07 s YD 4(17B)  GENERAL TAXATION PRINCIPLES FOR PARTNERSHIPS ¶23-100 Partnership returns For taxation purposes, a partnership is required to register with the Inland Revenue (IR). Upon receipt, IR issues a tax file number and may require the partnership to register for GST (see ¶23-110). In contrast to a company, a partnership is not a taxpayer in its own right. Although a partnership does not actually pay tax, it does have to file a return of income showing the income jointly derived from the partnership, how that income has been divided between the partners and a summary of the deductions allocated to each partner that relate to the income. In other words, the partnership files a return of net income for information  purposes only. Even if the partnership has made a tax loss for an income year, a return of income must be filed to show whether the business had income for the year and how that result was calculated. See C of IR v Grover (1988) 10 NZTC 5,012 (CA). For these purposes, the partnership should complete form IR 7. That return of income form should be accompanied by a copy of the firm’s financial statements. Legal position of partnerships General partnerships are not legal entities, meaning they have no existence separate from the individual partners that comprise them. Ownership of the partnership assets vests in each partner in accordance with the contract between them. Partners have joint and several liability for the liabilities of the partnership, although they may vary the sharing of those liabilities among themselves. This general legal position is followed by the tax system, with each partner being assessed on his or her proportionate share of partnership income as if it were derived directly by the individual partner and the deductions allowed to that partner in respect of that income. Various sources of income (such as interest and dividends) retain their character in the individual partner’s hands. Summary The tax position of general partnerships was summarised by Richardson J in Hadlee and Sydney Bridge Nominees Ltd v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,116 (CA) at 8,126: New Zealand tax legislation does not isolate partnership income as a separate source of income. In New Zealand law a partnership is not a separate tax entity. It is not a “taxpayer” and partners make a return of partnership income only for the purpose of providing information on which their separate incomes are calculated. The gross income is derived by the partners jointly and the partners severally claim the deductions to which they are entitled as taxpayers in terms of the legislation. This approach is formalised in s HG 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007 and s 42 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Different balance date  A partner may have a different balance date from the partnership. For example, the partner may have the standard 31 March balance date and the partnership one of 30 June. The general rules for the approval of balance dates will apply to partnerships. See ¶2-055. Although the introduction of a new partner or retirement of an existing partner creates a new partnership, the anniversary date of the introduction of a new partner will not be allowed as a new balance date. Returning partnership income To meet the invoicing requirements of the Accident Compensation Corporation, partnership income should be analysed and returned by the individual partners as follows: ▪ partnership income derived from the partnership’s trade or business that is a result of the partner’s active involvement ▪ interest and any resident withholding tax ▪ dividends and any credits ▪ overseas income and overseas tax paid ▪ rental income, and ▪ other income (ie income received as a sleeping partner or income generated from other investment activity of the partnership). In effect, this divides the partnership income into its active and passive components so that ACC levies are calculated only on the active income. Law: IT07 s HG 2; TAA s 42  ¶23-110 GST and partnerships Even though, for general law purposes, a partnership is not a separate entity, for GST purposes, a partnership is required to register as a single unincorporated body if supplies exceed the threshold for registration. All members of the body are jointly and severally liable for the tax payable by the body. The liability of members for tax payable for  taxable periods during which they were members remains even if they are no longer members of the body. A member will not stop being a member until the date the Commissioner receives written notice of the change in membership. One consequence of the rules for registration is that the collective purpose of the partnership may be separate from that of the individual members of the partnership. For example, in Case S41 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,280, partners in a professional partnership were considered to be making a supply on behalf of the partnership when committing the partnership to lease commercial premises. Accordingly, the partnership had to account for output tax on the resulting lease inducement payment. Transfer of an interest Question We’ve Been Asked QB 14/03, “GST — transfer of interest in a partnership”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 5, June 2014 at 57, considers the GST consequences on the disposal of a partner’s share in a partnership. The Commissioner’s view is that a disposal or transfer of a partner’s interest in a partnership will not be subject to GST unless the partner is GST-registered and the transfer of their interest occurs in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity that the partner carries on in their own right. In addition, the interest in the partnership must not be a “participatory security” or an “equity security”. A transfer will be an exempt supply and, therefore, not subject to GST if the partnership interest is a “participatory security” or an “equity security”. Generally, a partnership interest will be a “participatory security” where entry into the partnership involves an investment of money (or money’s worth), and where the partnership has more than five partners (or a manager (or person associated with the manager) who also manages another such arrangement). A partnership interest will be an “equity security” where the partnership is a body corporate (for example, a limited partnership registered under s 51 of the Limited Partnerships Act 2008). GST treatment of partnership capital contributions Question We’ve Been Asked QB 16/04, “GST treatment of partnership capital contributions”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 108, considers the situation when a new or existing partner in a partnership contributes capital to the partnership, as opposed to  transferring an interest to an individual partner (covered in QB 14/03 above). The item concludes that a GST-registered partnership is not required to account for output tax on a capital contribution made by a partner. If there is any supply of goods and services in return for the capital contribution, then it is a supply made by a partner or partners, not the partnership. The transfer of a partnership interest by an existing partner is the supply of a service, namely a chose in action consisting of a fractional interest in the future profits of the partnership business and in any surplus of assets over liabilities on winding up. Where a partnership capital contribution is made in return for the transfer of a partnership interest from an existing partner, the supply of the partnership interest is made by the existing partner in his or her capacity as a partner. The partnership interest is not supplied by the partnership. The item states that the deeming provisions in s 57(2)(b) and (c) do not apply. That is, the supply of a partnership interest by a partner in return for a capital contribution is not deemed to be made by the partnership for GST purposes. This is because the supply of the partnership interest will not have been made in the course of the partnership’s taxable activity. Consequently, no GST is charged by the partnership on the supply of a partnership interest that is transferred in return for a partnership capital contribution. Law: GST ss 3(2), 11(1)(m), 57  ¶23-115 Death of a partner When a partner in a partnership dies, the transfer of the partner’s interest in the partnership assets to the administrator or executor of the estate is treated as having been made at market value immediately before the date of death. Also, when a distribution is made of the deceased partner’s interest in the partnership assets by the administrator, executor or trustee of the deceased partner’s estate to the final beneficiary, the distribution is treated as having been made at market value on the date on which the distribution is made. There are exceptions to both of these rules for certain property transferred to a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner or to a person related to the deceased partner within the second degree of relationship. There is also an exception to the market value rule for the transfer of the  deceased’s partnership assets on final distribution of the estate for simple estates. These exceptions are discussed in ¶25-545. GST and death of a partner When a partner in a GST-registered partnership dies, the executor of the deceased estate steps into the shoes of the deceased partner as a “specified agent” for GST purposes. Within 21 days of the date of the death of the partner, the executor is required to notify Inland Revenue of his or her appointment as a specified agent. GST returns should continue to be filed by the partnership on the basis that any change of members within the partnership has no effect for GST purposes. The GST consequences of what occurs after the executor is appointed will differ depending on whether the partnership continues in a reconstituted form or ceases altogether. If the partnership continues in a reconstituted form (ie with one less partner, or with a change in partner) there are no GST consequences. Any change of members within the partnership has no effect for GST purposes. If the partnership is not reconstituted and the partnership ceases, there is a supply for GST purposes from the partnership to all partners (ie the estate beneficiary and the other partner(s)) on the dissolution of the partnership. Generally, a supply between associated persons is deemed to take place at market value. However, in cases where the partnership assets are transferred to a person associated with the partnership for no consideration (for example, if the recipient acquired the deceased partner’s share of the partnership assets under a will), it is possible that there will be no GST consequences on the transfer for either the partnership or the recipient. If the transfer takes place: ▪ while the partnership is GST-registered, and ▪ to a GST-registered recipient who acquires the assets for the principal purpose of making taxable supplies, the supply is not deemed to take place at market value. The result is no input tax credit for the recipient and no output tax for the partnership. This special GST rule was introduced to preserve the intended revenue-neutral effect of a supply of goods and services between two  registered associated persons when the goods or services are applied in the recipient’s taxable activity from the time of supply. Once all of the partnership assets have been transferred, the partnership can deregister for GST. Law: IT07 ss FC 1–FC 4, FZ 6; GST ss 2A, 5(3), 10(3), (3A), (3AB), (7A), 58  ¶23-120 Losses If a general partnership has made a loss, each partner may be able to utilise his or her share of that tax loss against taxable income from other sources. Should the partner be unable to fully absorb the tax loss against other income, the loss balance may be carried forward and used against income from later income years. A partner’s share of a general partnership loss is not necessarily limited to the amount of capital contributed. It may be the partner’s share of the partnership’s total tax loss if the partnership agreement so provides. See ¶23-080 for the loss limitation rule in limited partnerships. Example: A taxpayer was a partner in a partnership producing motion pictures. Her capital contribution was £10,000 and her share of the partnership loss for the first year was £41,144. The court held that the loss the taxpayer might offset against her other income was her share of the partnership loss determined according to the partnership agreement. Her loss offset was not limited to capital contributed. See Reed v Young [1984] BTC 424.  Law: IT07 ss IA 1–IA 4  ¶23-125 Deductions For the purposes of the partnership’s tax return, net income is computed in the same way as for an individual, ie annual total deductions are offset against annual gross income, giving rise to either a net income or a tax loss figure: see ¶1-090. However, unlike an individual who may carry a resulting loss balance forward to be used against future net income, the partnership may not do so. See ¶23-080. Certain expenditure incurred by a partnership is closely scrutinised by  Inland Revenue, as some payments may be seen as simple profitsharing arrangements. The general deduction provisions of subpart DA are applicable. See ¶23-128–¶23-136, ¶23-142 and ¶23-144.  ¶23-128 Partnership deductions — insurance premiums No deduction is permitted for insurance premiums payable on policies insuring the life of each partner when the proceeds are to be used as the means of buying out the deceased partner’s share. The premiums are regarded as non-deductible capital expenditure, since they are to facilitate the purchase of an asset — a share in the partnership. Another common insurance policy taken out by partners is one that insures against the death or disablement of any partner. The policy may be taken out by the partnership, or by a partner, and the benefits assigned to the partnership, so that the proceeds become payable to the partnership. The Commissioner’s view is that these policies are capital in nature. The policies relate to the protection or enlargement of the partnership’s income-producing assets and not to the production of partnership profits. Tax implications Consequently, when a partnership takes out life or accident policies on the lives of its partners, there are certain tax implications: ▪ No deduction is allowed for premiums paid by a partnership. The premiums relate to the eventual enlargement of the partnership’s income-producing assets and not to the production of profit, and are consequently capital in nature. ▪ Any proceeds received under the policy are a capital receipt in the hands of the partnership. ▪ On the death of a partner, their share of any proceeds under the policy is included in their partnership assets that form part of the estate for administration. ▪ Any payment of the proceeds by the partnership to a deceased partner’s spouse, civil union or de facto partner, child, family trust or estate is not allowed as a deduction.  ¶23-130 Partner misappropriation A person carrying on a business in partnership is allowed a deduction for any amount paid to make good a loss that another person (who is not a partner in the partnership or the spouse or civil union or de facto partner of a partner) suffers because of the misappropriation of property by a partner. The person must be under a legal liability to make good the loss. The provision also does not apply if the person or the person’s spouse or civil union or de facto partner misappropriates the property. The deduction is allowed in the year of payment. It is not necessary for the person to make the payment directly to the property owner. Any reimbursing payment made to an insurance office or indemnity fund that had previously made good the loss is allowed as a deduction. If the amount that was previously allowed as a deduction is recouped by way of insurance, indemnity or otherwise, this amount is, to the extent of the deduction, income derived by the person in the year of receipt. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 2, August 1994 at 3 and s CG 4. Law: IT07 ss CG 4, DB 43  ¶23-132 Salary of partner Under general law, a partner who works for the partnership does so in the capacity of partner and not as an employee. Any remuneration paid by the partnership for that work is by way of drawings and not as salary or wages. A partnership, therefore, may not claim a deduction for tax purposes for “wages” paid to a working partner. See Case F123 (1984) 6 NZTC 60,157 and Case L28 (1989) 11 NZTC 1,172. However, a deduction is allowed for payments (treated as salary or wages) made by a partnership to any working partner for services performed under a written contract of service, including any bonus. A “working partner” is a partner who personally and actively performs any of the duties to be performed in carrying on the partnership business. A “contract of service” is an agreement that satisfies all of the following criteria: ▪ the terms and conditions of the services to be performed by the partner are specified in the agreement  ▪ the amount payable to the partner for the performance of the services is specified in the agreement, and ▪ the agreement is in writing and is entered into by all the partners in the partnership. With respect to the deduction for any bonus paid, a deduction will still be allowed to the partnership for this payment whether or not it is authorised by the contract. Since the partnership is paying salary, the payments are subject to the PAYE rules, ie the payments are included in the definition of “salary or wages”. Similarly, the payments are “earnings as an employee” for accident compensation levy purposes. No FBT liability arises where fringe benefits are provided to salaried partners who are treated as employees for tax deduction purposes; rather, the cost of providing the benefit is non-deductible to the extent of the private use element. Accident compensation levies Active partners are liable to pay Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) levies on their total share of partnership income. Salaries paid to working partners are included in the definition of “salary or wages” and as such are PAYE income payments. PAYE income payments are included in the definition of “earnings as an employee”, which means that the partnership must deduct the ACC levies with the PAYE on the payment of the salary or wages to the partner and account for the work account levy on the salary or wages using the classification that reflects the business activity of the partnership. Sleeping partners (ie partners whose involvement is limited to the investment of capital, without taking any part in the management or day-to-day running of the business) are not liable for ACC levies on their share of the partnership income. This is because such income is not dependent on the person’s personal exertions and so does not amount to “earnings as a self-employed person”. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 3, March 2001 at 17. However, they remain liable to account for ACC levies on wages paid to partnership staff. See Chapter 31 for a more comprehensive discussion of ACC levies and the Accident Compensation Act.  Pensions paid to former partners A deduction is allowed for a reasonable amount of pension paid to a former partner or the surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner of a former partner in a partnership, pursuant to a deed providing for a pension for a fixed period, life or remarriage of the surviving spouse or partner. The deduction is not available for a partnership that mainly invests in property, equities or other securities. Law: IT07 ss DC 3, DC 4, RD 5(3)  ¶23-134 Rent paid to partnership An anti-avoidance provision applies to ensure that the amount of rent paid by a relative of a partner or a related company to a partnership is “adequate rent”. An adequate rent is an amount that the Commissioner determines to be adequate for the relevant property (generally, a market rent). That amount is deemed to have been payable for the period specified in any relevant lease agreement or, if no rent is payable under the lease, for each day of the lease term on a pro rata basis. The amount of deemed rental is income derived by the partnership. The Commissioner has issued a public binding ruling, BR Pub 06/02, “Section GD 10 [of the Income Tax Act 2004] — rent deemed to be payable by the lessee”, that concludes that a corresponding deduction will be allowed to the lessee in terms of the general permission. The ruling applies for an indefinite period to leases entered into on or following 1 February 2006 and is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 30. Law: IT07 ss DB 59, GC 5  ¶23-136 Deductibility for partnership of interest paid to partner The proper tax treatment of interest paid on capital contributed by a partner depends upon the sort of capital involved. This is because, under partnership law, only certain sorts of capital contributions are  entitled to payment of interest. Section 47 of the Partnership Law Act 2019 provides that a partner is not entitled to interest on capital subscribed by him or her apart from interest at 5% pa (subject to any agreement between the partners) on any actual payment or advance beyond the capital that he or she has agreed to subscribe. The Commissioner does not allow the partnership any deduction for interest paid on the partner’s initial capital contribution. The Commissioner treats any such payment of “interest” as a distribution of profits and as not having the character of interest in the hands of the partner. The Commissioner does allow the partnership a deduction for any interest paid on any loan or advance made to the partnership over and above the partner’s initial capital contribution. For this purpose, a loan or advance also extends to any partnership profits that the partner has not drawn out but has left in with the partnership. The rate of interest that the partnership might pay can exceed the statutory 5%, if the parties agree otherwise. Moreover, since any such payment is recognised as truly a payment of interest, it retains that character in the hands of the partner. Public rulings on interest deductibility for partnerships The Commissioner has issued a series of public rulings applying the principles set down in the Australian decision FC of T v JD Roberts; FC of T v Smith 92 ATC 4380 (known as Roberts and Smith) to the deductibility of interest under s DB 6. In Roberts and Smith, interest on borrowings raised by a partnership to repay partnership working capital was allowed as a deduction, even though the repayment was able to be used by a partner to fund private expenditure. The character of the refinancing was the same as the original borrowing, which was that of the provision of working capital. It was held that the interest was deductible even though the borrowed funds were not used directly in deriving income. Capital contributions, past years’ profits and debt were all considered capable of being replaced and repaid in this way. The case only applies where the amount replaced and repaid is owed to a person separate to the business, like a partner in a partnership or a shareholder of a company.  In public ruling BR Pub 15/04, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed by a partnership to return capital contributions to a partner”, the Commissioner allows a deduction for interest in respect of funds used by a partnership to return capital to partners who previously invested that capital. Any partner’s share of the interest is deductible by that partner to the extent that the partner’s capital contribution was used directly in the partnership’s business or used to repay borrowed funds on which interest was deductible. That interest is not deductible to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the partnership to pay current year income to the partner or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. (See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 5, June 2015 at 3.) In public ruling BR Pub 15/05, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed by a partnership to return past years’ profits to a partner”, the Commissioner allows a deduction for interest in respect of funds used by a partnership to pay profits to partners, but only to the extent that the profits are past years’ profits that were used directly in the partnership’s business, or used to repay borrowed funds on which interest was deductible. That interest is not deductible to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the partnership to pay current year income to the partner or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. (See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 5, June 2015 at 3.) In public ruling BR Pub 15/08, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed to repay debt”, the Commissioner allows a deduction for interest in respect of funds used by a partnership to repay borrowed funds to a person who invested those funds in the partnership in certain specified circumstances. (See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 5, June 2015 at 3.) The rulings apply for an indefinite period from 24 May 2015. They are reissues of previous rulings BR Pub 10/14, BR Pub 10/15 and BR Pub 10/18. Law: IT07 s DB 6; PL s 47  ¶23-138 RWT on interest paid to a partner  Interest paid to a partner for a loan or advance is subject to resident withholding tax (RWT) if the partner is a non-exempt recipient. A partnership carrying on an activity in New Zealand will generally be liable to deduct RWT from a payment of interest. A partnership is not liable to deduct RWT from interest paid when, although it does not have RWT-exempt status at the time of payment: ▪ it has made payments of resident passive income, being interest, totalling $5,000 or less (prior to 1 April 2020, less than $5,000) in the year immediately preceding the year in which the time of payment falls, and ▪ the payment, when aggregated with earlier payments of resident passive income, being interest, paid by the partnership in the year in which the time of payment falls, does not exceed $5,000. This means that when a partnership pays interest to a partner, it must consider whether it paid more than $5,000 interest in the previous year, and whether the total amount of interest paid in the current year (including the payment being made) will exceed $5,000. If so, it must deduct RWT from the payment being made. See the example in ¶15080. Law: IT07 ss RE 4, RE 10  ¶23-140 Husband and wife, de facto or civil union partners in partnership A business carried on by a husband and wife, de facto or civil union partners in partnership does not need to be carried on pursuant to a deed of partnership. The determination of whether the spouses or partners are carrying on a business as partners is based on the facts of each case. Example 1: The Taxation Review Authority held that a husband and his wife were equal owners and partners in respect of a rental property. Rental losses that were attributed solely to the husband were therefore reallocated to be shared equally between the couple for tax purposes. Both taxpayers were jointly liable under the mortgage, both were ratepayers on  the valuation roll and 100% allocation of the losses could be viewed as self-serving from a taxation point of view. See Case S2 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,012.  Example 2: A married couple objected successfully to an assessment when the Commissioner failed to establish that a partnership existed between the couple and the family trust. See Mathieson (IF) Trust Partnership v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,286.  ¶23-142 Partnership employing relatives Family partnerships between husband and wife, civil union partners, de facto partners, or between parent and child(ren) may be a convenient way of reducing tax liabilities. However, the Commissioner is authorised to reallocate, for tax purposes, excessive salary or excessive shares of profits or losses. In determining whether the remuneration or share in profits is reasonable, the nature and extent of the services rendered, the value of the partners’ contributions to capital or provision of services and any other relevant matters are taken into consideration. The following are a range of situations in which the Commissioner may make an allocation in the case of a partnership: ▪ a partnership employs a relative of one of the partners or, when the partner is a company, employs a relative of a director or shareholder of the company to perform services in connection with the partnership business ▪ a business is carried on in partnership with a relative or with any company and a director or shareholder is a relative of a partner in the partnership, or ▪ a company carries on business in partnership with a relative of a director or shareholder of the company. If the Commissioner considers that the remuneration, salary, share of profits or other income payable for the benefit of the relative or company is unreasonable or the share of losses to be borne by the relative or company is unreasonable, she may reallocate the income or losses of the business in such shares or proportions as she considers  reasonable. Any amount so allocated is deemed to be income derived or a loss incurred by the person to whom they are so allocated. In cases where an amount paid by a company to a relative of a director or shareholder is allocated to the company, the amount so allocated will be deemed to be a dividend paid by the company and derived by the relative. Example 1: Amounts paid to a taxpayer’s five-year-old son for services provided to his father’s building business were held to be excessive under s 106 of the Land and Income Tax Act 1954 (s GB 23). Judge Barber held that it was unreal to regard the child as providing services to his father’s building business for which it was appropriate for him to receive wages. Case L64 (1989) 11 NZTC 1,374.  Example 2: A husband and wife were partners in an insurance consultancy partnership. The deed of partnership provided for the husband to receive a two-thirds share of the partnership income arising from the commissions. The Taxation Review Authority held that the deed of partnership was a bona fide contract of partnership since the allocation of profits correctly reflected each partner’s contribution of capital and services. Case M65 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,368.  In August 2014, Inland Revenue released Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 14/09, “Income Tax — Meaning of ‘Excessive Remuneration’ and ‘Excessive Profits or Losses’ Paid or Allocated to Relatives, Partners, Shareholders or Directors” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 9, October 2014 at 22). The item asks when the payment of remuneration or allocation of profits or losses is considered to be excessive for the purposes of ss GB 23 to GB 25B. With respect to partnerships, the item concludes that any remuneration, profits or losses will be considered excessive where: ▪ the amount paid is more than a reasonable reward for the services provided by a relative ▪ the share of partnership profits or losses exceeds the value of the contributions made by the partner.  The Commissioner considers an amount of remuneration is “reasonable” if it is appropriate or fair for the services provided. The item states the following criteria the Commissioner will consider for determining a reasonable payment for services rendered: ▪ The nature of the services and the circumstances in which they will be or are performed. ▪ The knowledge and skills required to carry out the services, including any particular qualifications. ▪ The amount of payment that the person carrying out the duties would be paid by another independent employer for like services. ▪ The locality where the duties are being performed. ▪ The amount the taxpayer would be prepared to pay an arm’s length employee undertaking similar duties. With regard to the allocation of partnership income and losses, the item states that where there is no partnership agreement, partnership profits and losses should be divided equally between the partners following the presumption under s 45 of the Partnership Law Act 2019 (see also Case S2 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,012). When considering whether a partner’s share of profits or losses is excessive, the Commissioner may also take into account the capital contributions of the partners as shown in any agreement, including when a partner has made assets available to the partnership. This may include taking into account any payments received for the use of these assets. The Commissioner may also consider services provided by each partner, including responsibilities undertaken, special skills or expertise, work done, and time spent on partnership business (see also Case B45 (1976) 2 NZTC 60,394). Where there is a genuine contract of partnership under s GB 24(2), the Commissioner cannot reallocate any amounts attributed to the partners (see Case M65 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,368 and ¶23-144). Law: IT07 ss GB 23, GB 24  ¶23-144 Exception for genuine contracts  On the face of it, s GB 23 would appear to grant to the Commissioner very broad powers to control the level of remuneration paid to relatives. See ¶23-142. However, there is an important exception to the effect that the Commissioner may not rely upon these powers when the parties are employed under a genuine contract of employment or there is a genuine contract of partnership. For these purposes, a genuine contract of employment or partnership is one in which: ▪ the contract is in writing and is signed by all of the parties to it ▪ all of the parties are aged 20 or more at the time of signing ▪ the contract is binding for at least three years (except for death, bankruptcy or dissolution by the court in the case of a partnership contract) ▪ each party to the contract has real and effective control of the income to which they are entitled under the contract ▪ each party to a partnership contract has real and effective control or liability for their share of profits or losses respectively under the contract, and ▪ no part of the income or share of profits of the relative is a disposition for inadequate consideration. Should the contract fail to be regarded as genuine, the Commissioner may reallocate the remuneration or share of profits paid under the agreement. See ¶23-142. Law: IT07 s GB 24  ¶23-148 Financial arrangements rules and partnerships No base price adjustment is triggered solely by the reconstitution of partnership interests. This is because an interest in a partnership is an “excepted financial arrangement”. As such, the transfer of a partnership interest is excluded from the financial arrangements rules. The rules for determining the tax treatment of financial arrangements included in the disposal of a partnership interest are set out in s HG 8.  See further at ¶23-050. Law: IT07 s EW 5(11)  ¶23-152 Distinction between joint venture and partnership It is important to distinguish between a partnership and a joint venture as the two entities are taxed differently and file different income tax returns. No joint return of income is required by persons other than partners. Therefore, each member of an unincorporated joint venture files its own income tax return, and there is no joint tax return. Perhaps the most important distinction between a partnership and a joint venture is that a partnership is an association of persons who engage in a common undertaking for profit, whereas a joint venture is an association of persons who engage in a common undertaking to generate a product to be shared among the participants. See United Dominions Corporation Ltd v Brian Pty Ltd (1985) 60 ALR 741 at 750. In an article entitled “Partnership — Joint Ventures and Taxation” by MJ Walsh (December 1978/January 1979 issue of Taxation in Australia at 481), a joint venture is described as “a relationship between two or more parties formed for a particular commercial transaction or transactions, the product of which will be taken by the joint venturers in such shares as may be mutually agreed between them and disposed of by them individually at such times as the venturers may individually determine”. A joint venture can be treated as a partnership for tax purposes if all of the joint venturers elect to be treated as a partnership. Law: TAA s 42(4)  ASSIGNMENT OF INTEREST ¶23-160 Assignment of interest Assignment of income from a partnership to another family member or entity with a lower marginal tax rate has often been employed as a tax minimisation technique. However, most of these assignments have failed, mainly for two reasons. First, any attempt to assign the profits of  a partnership is an assignment of future income that crystallises only after the income has been earned and derived. Therefore, any assignment of that income will be ineffective to shift the liability for tax on that income. Secondly, income from a partnership, particularly a professional one, arises from the rendering of personal services, and the derivation and assessment of this income is attributable to the person whose services result in the earning of that income. Australia In the Australian decision FC of T v Everett 80 ATC 4076, the taxpayer was a partner in a firm of solicitors and, for a consideration of $3,832, he assigned to his wife (also a solicitor) 6/13 of his share in the partnership “together with all those rights including the right to receive an appropriate share of the profits of the partner to which an assignee … is entitled by virtue of Section 31 of the Partnership Act 1892” (at 4,078). For the income year ended 30 June 1973, the taxpayer’s share of profits from the firm was $35,418 and the firm paid $11,185 of it to the taxpayer’s wife. The Commissioner assessed both the taxpayer and his wife on the whole of the amount that had been paid to her. The Supreme Court of New South Wales, the Federal Court of Australia (by a 2:1 majority) and the Full Court of the High Court of Australia (by a 4:1 majority) upheld the effectiveness of the assignment. High Court The Australian High Court held that the assignment of the partner’s share gave the recipient an immediate right to the future partnership income arising from that share, and that the partnership income was derived from the partner’s share in the partnership and not from his personal exertions. However, this decision runs contrary to a number of New Zealand decisions, notably Kelly v C of IR; Freed v C of IR [1970] NZLR 161 where it was held that an assignment of income was ineffective where it was a mere income-splitting device in favour of a related party. See Johnstone v C of IR [1966] NZLR 833 and Spratt v C of IR [1964] NZLR 272 where Henry J made the obiter remark that no taxpayer could by way of assignment escape assessment of tax on income resulting from his or her personal activities because such income always remains his or her income irrespective of the method used to dispose of it.  New Zealand In New Zealand, the Privy Council affirmed a Court of Appeal decision that an assignment by a partner of part of his rights in a professional partnership is ineffective in transferring the tax liability on the partnership income. In Hadlee and Sydney Bridge Nominees Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,106 (PC), the taxpayer was a partner in an accounting firm where the partnership agreement provided for profits to be given to partners in proportion to the number of units of partnership capital held by them. The taxpayer owned 32 of the 452 units and he assigned 12.8 (40%) of these units to a family trust in return for covenants by the assignee and a sum of $16,299. One-twentieth of this amount was payable in cash, with the balance due on demand in writing and 6% interest payable in the meantime. If the assignment had been effective, there would have been significant tax savings as trust income would have been assessed at a lower level. High Court In the High Court ((1989) 11 NZTC 6,155), it was held that the taxpayer remained personally assessable for tax on the whole income, the assignment was of future property or an expectancy and passed income to the assignee through the conduit of the partner. The High Court also held that income from personal services or exertions was incapable of assignment for income tax purposes and that the assignment was void under s 99 of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s BG 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007), the general anti-avoidance provision. Court of Appeal In the Court of Appeal ((1991) 13 NZTC 8,116), the Court upheld the second of the two grounds advanced by the High Court but disagreed with the first. The Court held that there had been a valid equitable assignment of an expectancy for value; when the subject matter came into existence, the beneficial interest vested in the assignee immediately. The principle being that when property comes into existence, equity, treating that as done that ought to be done, fastens upon the property and the contract to assign becomes in equity a complete assignment. New Zealand law, therefore, takes a tougher stance than in Australia, where the Everett decision allowed an assignment of part of a partnership share by a solicitor to his wife. It  must also be noted that the decision was made under the influence of policy considerations. In relation to employment income, the whole PAYE structure proceeds on the premise that income of that kind is derived by the employee concerned. The statutory scheme did not allow for the possibility of diversion of that income before its derivation by the employee. If such conclusions applied to the income of salary and wage earners, they must equally apply to the earnings of the selfemployed from their personal exertions since the character or quality of the income that arises is the same in either case. Privy Council The Privy Council found that the taxpayer had not assigned, and could not assign, a proprietary interest. The taxpayer did not have title to specific partnership property but had a beneficial interest in all and each of the assets. This interest was enforceable against his copartners to the extent of seeing that the partnership assets were used for the benefit of the partnership, but he could not assign it to a nonpartner. This beneficial interest was in the nature of a future interest taking effect in possession on (and not before) the determination of the partnership. The deed of assignment was ineffective to transfer the tax liability for the income assigned to the assignee. The income that accrued to the assignee did not flow from a capital asset that was capable of assignment but from the performance of the taxpayer’s obligations under the partnership contract. The Privy Council agreed with the comments of the Court of Appeal that the person whose personal exertion earned the income, whether a salary and wage earner or a professional, derived that income and paid the tax. It was considered unnecessary to deal with the construction of s 10 of the Income Tax Act 1976 (now s HG 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007 and s 42 of the Tax Administration Act 1994) and its effect on the assignment of a share in a partnership; nor was there any ruling on whether the arrangements fell within the ambit of s 99 of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s BG 1). See also Case S4 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,021.  ¶23-175 Application of anti-avoidance provisions It is necessary to consider which provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007 affect an assignment of a share in a partnership. These include ss BG 1 and GA 1, ie the general anti-avoidance provisions. Features of an  arrangement that will indicate to Inland Revenue that an assignment amounts to tax avoidance include the following: ▪ the transfer of income or property is for a short term ▪ the arrangement has little real effect on business income or earning activity ▪ the transaction cannot be described as an ordinary family or commercial transaction ▪ a high degree of control over the earning of income or the disposition of the property is a part of the arrangement, and ▪ there is a close family or business relationship between parties to the transaction. Interpretive guidelines have been developed by the courts to determine when alienation of income and short-term transfer of income-earning property constitute tax avoidance. See Elmiger v C of IR [1966] NZLR 683, Mangin v C of IR 70 ATC 6001; [1971] NZLR 591 and Case J61 (1987) 9 NZTC 1,366. On the specific issue of the assignment of partnership profits, see ¶23160. Law: IT07 ss BG 1, GA 1, GB 23; PL s 57  PARTNERSHIPS AND IMPUTATION REGIME ¶23-182 Imputation credits and foreign tax credits A partnership is merely an association of taxpayers, and therefore, imputation credits pass through the partnership to the individual partners. When a partnership holds shares in a company and receives a dividend with an imputation credit attached to it, those credits are passed on to the individual partners according to the provisions in s LE 6. Effectively, these provisions contain a formula that allocates to the individual partners their share of the tax credits in the same proportion as the partnership income is apportioned to them. A partnership does  not create or maintain an imputation credit account. The partners can, however, be affected by the imputation and other memorandum accounts. Special rules apply to non-resident partners. Briefly, the calculation of the non-resident partner’s share of imputation credits excludes any supplementary dividends derived by him or her. However, the gross amount of credits to be allocated by the partnership includes any supplementary dividends derived by non-resident partners. New Zealand resident partners of Australian limited partnerships Foreign tax credits are available to New Zealand partners of Australian limited partnerships when tax is paid in respect of foreign income that is assessable in New Zealand if the tax is equivalent to New Zealand income tax or non-resident withholding tax. The availability of such tax credits is addressed in five public rulings that were issued by Inland Revenue on 22 February 2018. See BR Pub 18/01, “Income tax — Australian source income earned by Australian limited partnership and foreign tax credits”; BR Pub 18/02, “Income tax — Distributions made by Australian limited partnership and foreign tax credits”; BR Pub 18/03, “Income tax — Distributions made by Australian unit trust to Australian limited partnership and foreign tax credits”; BR Pub 18/04, “Income tax — Franked dividend received by Australian limited partnership and foreign tax credits”; and BR Pub 18/05, “Income tax — Tax paid by an Australian limited partnership as a ‘head company’ and foreign tax credits”. These rulings, which are limited in scope to Australian limited partnerships that are treated as companies under Australian law but retain partnership treatment for New Zealand tax purposes, apply from the first day of the 2017–18 income year to the last day of the 2021–22 income year. The rulings are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 48. The rulings are a reissue of BR Pub 14/01– BR Pub 14/05. Law: IT07 s LE 6  ¶23-184 Company as partner When a limited liability company is a partner in a partnership, any imputation credit accruing to the partnership and allocated to the corporate partner using the formula in s LE 6 is credited by the  company to its imputation credit account in the imputation year in which the dividend is paid. Law: IT07 s OB 9  ¶23-186 Trustee as partner When a trustee is a partner in a partnership, that trustee receives an allocation of the partnership’s imputation credits in accordance with s LE 6. The trustee must then allocate those credits to the beneficiaries of the trust in accordance with s LE 5. Law: IT07 s LE 5  LIVESTOCK VALUATIONS ¶23-187 Valuation by new partnership Taxpayers in partnerships cannot change livestock valuation schemes, ie national standard costs, herd valuation, cost price, market value or replacement value, high-priced livestock, and bloodstock valuation, by forming another partnership of principally the same partners, thus circumventing the two years’ notice requirement of s EC 11: see ¶27295. Where a new partnership is formed in any income year and: ▪ the new partnership owns a type of specified livestock, eg cattle, and ▪ more than 50% of the property of the new partnership at the end of the income year is owned by partners who owned, either in that income year or in the previous income year, all the property of the old partnership, and ▪ the old partnership owned the same type of specified livestock the new partnership must value that type of livestock under the same valuation scheme as the old partnership.  A special rule also applies where livestock that is valued under the herd scheme by a taxpayer is transferred to an associated person. See ¶27264. Law: IT07 s EC 13  ¶23-189 Partnership elections of livestock valuation Where specified livestock is owned by two or more persons jointly: ▪ for an election to be valid in respect of that livestock, the election must be made by those persons jointly, and ▪ if no election is made, that livestock must be valued under the national standard cost scheme (for bailed or leased specified livestock, see below). Bailed or leased specified livestock or livestock subject to a profitsharing arrangement Specified livestock that is owned by two or more persons and that has been bailed or leased to another person must be valued at market value, unless the joint owners make a joint election to use a different valuation method. This rule also applies to specified livestock that is subject to a “profit-sharing arrangement”. Briefly, a “profit-sharing arrangement” is an arrangement with the following features: ▪ the specified livestock is made available to another person without a specified fee ▪ any return or compensation received for making the specified livestock available depends on the profits of the business carried on by the other person ▪ the person making the livestock available participates in the profits and losses of the business carried on by the other person, and ▪ if a partnership arises between the two parties, the person making the livestock available is bound by the requirements of the Partnership Law Act 2019.  There are additional implications for specified livestock that is made available to another person under a profit-sharing arrangement and that is valued under the national standard cost scheme or the cost price method. In that event, there is a notional single owner of the livestock comprising the actual owner, any other bailor and the person who has use of the livestock. A livestock valuation election made in respect of a person’s livestock interest in a partnership is treated separately from any other livestock interest that the person has. Law: IT07 ss EC 12, YA 1  SPECIAL COMPANIES AND ASSOCIATIONS Background to special companies and associations  ¶24-010  Special Companies  ¶24-015  Clubs, Societies and Associations  ¶24-080  Statutory Producer Boards and Co-operatives  ¶24-140  Unit Trusts  ¶24-190  Charities  ¶24-195  Māori Land Act 1993 (Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993)  ¶24-280  Māori Authorities  ¶24-288  Crown Research Institutes  ¶24-390  ¶24-010 Background to special companies and associations Clubs, incorporated societies and co-operatives consist of groups of people who have generally joined together to further some common purpose. A principle of income tax is that people cannot make profits by trading with themselves. An extension of this is that amounts arising from transactions between members of mutual associations are not deemed to be gross income and consequently associations are required to return only amounts arising from transactions with non-members. The taxation provisions relating to clubs and societies are contained throughout the Income Tax Act 2007. The starting point, however, is that incorporated bodies are taxed as companies while unincorporated bodies are taxed as individuals. It then  becomes necessary to determine whether there is some specific section in the Act that is applicable to the body concerned. For tax purposes, a company is defined as a body corporate or other entity that has a legal existence separate from its members, whether it is incorporated or created in New Zealand or elsewhere. The effect of this definition is that generally any club, society, association or trade union is liable to be treated for tax purposes as if it were an ordinary company. The Income Tax Act provides for the special treatment of certain types of company. That special treatment may be in the form of specific provisions for some of the items of income or some of the deductions to be taken into account when calculating the company’s net income; specific provision as to how the net income of the company is to be calculated for the income year; particular rates of tax applying to that net income and special rules for calculating the voting interests and market value interests of shareholders. Incorporated societies that are treated as companies for tax purposes can avail themselves of the same rules that allow other corporate entities to carry forward losses and offset them against those of companies in the same group. This is achieved by including incorporated societies that do not issue shares in the definition of “special corporate entity” to which special rules for calculating the voting interests and market value interests of shareholders apply (see ¶16-155). The Income Tax Act allows a special deduction for non-profit bodies and other organisations, and there are a number of income tax exemptions available for certain societies and organisations. See ¶24-080 and ¶24-120. These exemptions relate only to income tax. Therefore, the organisation concerned may still be liable for such other taxes as GST, fringe benefit tax and RWT. Law: IT07 s YA 1  SPECIAL COMPANIES ¶24-015 Airport operators  The income of a resident airport operator (comprising a joint venture between the Crown and any local authority that is an airport authority) is taxed at the company tax rate. In operating the airport, the operator is deemed to be carrying on a business. Any airport asset is deemed to have been acquired by the airport operator at the time of its acquisition or first use for an amount equal to its then current market value. See s HR 6. Depreciation is calculated on the basis of that deemed cost price. Since 1 April 1993 airport runways have been depreciable. See sch 13 and ¶13-500. Deduction for funds advanced Funds may be advanced to the airport operator for the purpose of running the airport. In that event, the funds are treated as money borrowed by the airport operator. Any return to the lender is treated as interest and is, consequently, allowed as a deduction. See s HR 5(7) and (8). However, no deduction is allowed in respect of any appropriation of funds for the benefit of any deemed shareholder or any consideration provided to or for the benefit of any deemed shareholder. See s DW 1. Effectively, these restrictions make it clear that no deduction is permitted for payments in the nature of a dividend. They do not prevent a deduction for any payment that is in the nature of interest (as above). Apart from the special rules already described, an airport operator calculates its income in the ordinary manner, ie the other provisions of the Act apply but are subject to the specific provisions made in respect of airport operators. Law: IT07 ss DW 1, HR 5–HR 7, sch 13  ¶24-020 State enterprises and mixed-ownership enterprises A State enterprise (formerly referred to as a State-owned enterprise) is treated as a separate business entity and is subject to income tax on any income it receives. They are excluded from the income tax exemption afforded to public authorities (see ¶5-605). A state enterprise is also a category of a special corporate entity (see below and ¶16-155). State enterprises are listed in sch 36, pt A.  A mixed-ownership enterprise is excluded from the definition of “public authority” and therefore does not enjoy an income tax exemption either. A mixed-ownership enterprise can be included as part of a group of companies for the purposes of offsetting losses only if no other company in the group is a mixed-ownership enterprise. Mixed-ownership enterprises are listed in sch 36, pt B. Law: IT07 ss CW 38(5)(b), (5B), IC 3(2A), YA 1, sch 36  ¶24-032 Energy companies Energy companies are taxed like any other company under the general provisions of the Income Tax Act. Available subscribed capital — calculation for energy companies When the energy companies were corporatised, there was some doubt about whether the shares issued on the corporatisation gave rise to any available subscribed capital. However, Inland Revenue confirmed that available subscribed capital arose from the shares issued on corporatisation. See interpretation statement IS3507, “Available subscribed capital — energy companies”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 2, February 1999 at 18.  ¶24-035 Council-controlled organisations Local authorities are required to pay tax on all income (excluding rates) derived from any council-controlled organisation (CCO) linked by ownership or control to the local authority, other than income derived from a CCO operating a hospital as a charitable activity on behalf of the local authority. This ensures that these entities operate on a competitively neutral basis. These enterprises (CCOs as defined in s 6 of the Local Government Act 2002) have been established to carry on specific trading activities of local authorities and are themselves taxed depending on their nature, ie on the same basis as companies, trusts, etc. A look-through provision is also provided for in the CCO definition to ensure that second tier and further tier subsidiaries of first tier CCOs also come within the CCO  definition. Consequently, a local authority (as specified in sch 2 to the Local Government Act) is liable for tax on all income it derives from such second tier and further tier subsidiaries. Charitable and/or district improvement income tax exemptions do not apply to most CCOs or local authorities in respect of income derived from most CCOs. See Wellington Regional Stadium Trust v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,648, upheld on appeal to the Court of Appeal: C of IR v Wellington Regional Stadium Trust (2005) 22 NZTC 19,445. Briefly, the definition of a CCO includes organisations that: ▪ are subject to the direct or indirect control of one or more local authorities, or ▪ have the direct or indirect power to control at least 50% of the votes at any meeting of the members or controlling body or the direct or indirect right to appoint at least 50% of the trustees, directors or managers of the organisation. Local authorities are also liable for tax on any income they derive from port companies (or their subsidiaries) or energy companies that are under their control. Dividends derived by a local authority from a CCO, or from an energy company or port company or its subsidiary under the local authority’s control, fall outside the tax exemption for intercorporate dividends. Law: IT07 ss CW 10(3), CW 39(2)–(5), CW 40(2), CW 41(4), CW 42(2), YA 1  ¶24-040 Harbour boards As part of the Government’s policy to privatise certain State enterprises, port companies were established in 1988 to purchase the property and assets of harbour boards and to carry out portrelated commercial activities. Most port companies are now owned by local authorities, regional councils or other shareholder entities.  Therefore, amounts derived from a port-related commercial undertaking are treated as income. Law: IT07 s CW 39(5)  ¶24-050 Building societies A building society’s taxable income will include all receipts of income against which it may deduct expenses incurred in earning those receipts. Tax is levied at the company rate. Special provision is allowed for a building society to claim a deduction for expenditure arising from borrowing in the form of withdrawable shares (ie dividends on fixed deposit accounts, passbook savings accounts and bonus balloting shares). A deduction may also be claimed for interest and other financial charges that the society incurs in providing money that is used, in that income year, to provide an interest-free loan to the holder of a terminating share (this covers expenses incurred in not actually gaining income) and any amount paid to purchase a balloted loan right from the holder of a terminating share. Under the first of these categories, the building society is able to deduct interest on withdrawable shares on an accrual basis. This is on the footing that the shares constitute a financial arrangement subject to the financial arrangements rules. Dividends and profits distributed by a building society are treated as income under the Act and cash prizes are also defined as income. For resident withholding tax purposes, dividends paid by a building society in relation to withdrawable shares are deemed to be interest. Law: IT07 ss CC 6, DV 10, RE 2(4), YA 1  ¶24-060 Flat-owning companies A flat-owning company normally derives income in the form of subscriptions or levies imposed upon shareholders. This income is applied to meet administration and management costs, as well as depreciation, repairs and maintenance and other outgoings on the  property. As a matter of practice, the Commissioner does not assess a flat-owning company on income of this nature. The same practice applies to surplus contributions held in suspense to meet the outgoings to be satisfied in future years. A flat-owning company remains assessable on income not raised by way of subscription to meet outgoings on the property. This means that the company would be assessable on any rents and investment income. Dividend exemption Making company property available for the use of any shareholder for inadequate consideration is generally a dividend for tax purposes. However, a dividend does not arise when a flat-owning company makes residential property available to its shareholders. To be eligible for the exemption, the company’s constitution must provide for the entitlement of each shareholder to the use of residential property, and the company’s assets must be restricted to residential property and funds reserved for maintenance and other outgoings on the property. Natural persons, trustee and company shareholders are all entitled to the exemption. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 9, February 1996 at 1. Qualifying company regime A flat-owning company could be a qualifying company (for companies electing before 1 April 2011). However, a flat-owning company is not eligible to be a look-through company. See ¶19-165. Law: IT07 ss CD 31, HA 6(1)  ¶24-070 Group investment funds The ability to form a group investment fund (GIF) enables a trustee company to gather the funds of many small investors into an administratively efficient entity. The investors may be estates, trusts or other persons, who request the trustee company to act as an agent in investing funds. Funds from the latter are known as agency funds. A GIF may be established only by the Public Trust or by a trustee company pursuant to the Trustee Companies Act 1967, Public Trust Office Act 1957 or Public Trust Act 2001.  Basis of taxation Trustees of a GIF are required to file separate returns of “Category A” and “Category B” income. In terms of the core provisions, separate tax liabilities arise for each of these categories of income. By s BC 7, trustees who derive Category A income (ie schedular income) are required to calculate an income tax liability for that income, under the general calculation provisions, as if it were their only income. This gives rise to a schedular income tax liability. For these purposes, a GIF trustee’s schedular taxable income for Category A income (ie income less deductions from investments not giving rise to Category B income) is taxed at the same rate as the corporate tax rate. The current tax rate for Category A income is 28%. Category B income is income derived from the fund’s traditional activities of investing in authorised trustee investments, eg mortgages, government stock and certain debentures. The trustee is taxed on that Category B income at the rate of 33%, subject to the trust rules and s HZ 2. The trustee of a fund is deemed to be the agent for any absentee investor’s distributions from the fund. The tax rate for Category B income depends on whether the GIF is a “widely-held GIF”. Widely-held GIFs are taxed at the rate of 28% on both their Category A and B income, whereas GIFs that are not widely-held continue to be taxed at the trustee rate of 33% on their Category B income and at the rate of 28% on their Category A income. A widely-held GIF is one that satisfies the investor membership requirements for an entity other than a company in the portfolio investment entity (PIE) rules (s HM 14(1)) and one or more of paras (a) and (c)–(e) of the definition of a “public unit trust” (see s YA 1 and ¶24-192). Distributions from a GIF The definition of a “company” includes a trustee of a GIF (other than a designated GIF) but only in respect of its Category A income. Distributions of Category A income to investors are treated as dividends. See s CD 4 and the definitions of “company” and “share”  in s YA 1. Distributions of Category B income are treated as distributions from a trust and subject to the trust rules. See ¶25-115. When the trustee or manager of a GIF deriving Category A income (or a person nominated by the trustee or manager) redeems investors’ interests in the ordinary course of business, the dividend derived by the investor does not include any imputation credits attached to the dividend to the extent to which it constitutes a recovery of the purchase price. See ¶16-630. In certain circumstances, where an interest in an unlisted GIF is redeemed or cancelled the redemption amount (or part of it) may be excluded from being a dividend. For a further discussion of the tax treatment of redemptions by GIFs and a discussion of whether the ordering rule or slice rule will apply to those redemptions, see ¶16705 and ¶24-190. It should be noted that if a superannuation fund held an interest in a GIF on 1 April 1999, any subsequent redemption of that interest by the GIF will not be subject to the slice rule, unless the GIF’s trustee elected otherwise before that date. Deductibility of management fees Pursuant to the Trustee Companies Amendment Act 2002 a trustee company can charge a fee to the GIF for its management services. These fees are deductible to the GIF in accordance with the general permission in s DA 1. Transfer of expenditure Group investment funds investing in unit trusts or in other GIFs incur expenditure on administration and management but may only derive dividend income that is usually fully imputed. Unless the GIF has income from another source, such as interest, the GIF accumulates excess credits that it cannot use. There are provisions that allow GIFs to use their excess imputation credits without the need to enter into arrangements to ensure they have income streams to absorb them. A GIF deriving Category A income (member fund) that invests in a public unit trust or another GIF deriving Category A income (master fund) can elect to transfer expenditure to that master fund. A “public unit trust” is defined as either a retail unit trust (whose units  are offered to the public and that has a hundred or more unit holders) or a wholesale unit trust (whose units are held by widely held investment vehicles such as other unit trusts or superannuation funds). See ¶24-192. All expenditure can be transferred, other than expenditure on revenue account property and expenditure on some financial arrangements. The master fund is able to deduct the expenditure, and the expenditure is treated as not having been incurred by the member fund. The master fund cannot deduct more than its taxable income for the year in which the income is transferred, less all nonresident passive income derived by the master fund in that year. For expenditure to be transferred, the member fund must have funds invested in the master fund at all times between the date on which the member fund incurs the expenditure and the last day of the tax year in which the expenditure is deducted by the master fund. If the master fund is a multi-rate PIE (see ¶29-115) then the master fund is allowed a deduction for the expenditure transferred from a member fund. However, the amount transferred must not be more than the member fund’s share of the multi-rate PIE’s taxable income. Any amount paid to the member fund by the master fund for the expenditure transferred is not income or a dividend for tax purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 11, November 2001 at 39. The expenditure transferred gives rise to a credit in the master fund’s imputation credit account on 31 March of the tax year in which the expenditure is deducted. Similarly, the expenditure transferred gives rise to a debit in the member fund’s imputation credit account on 31 March of the tax year in which the expenditure is transferred. If the debit to the member fund’s imputation credit account in these circumstances results in a debit balance, there is no requirement to pay further income tax on the debit arising on transfer of the expenditure. Available subscribed capital accounts (ASCA) A GIF commonly overpays tax to counteract the loss of available subscribed capital when redemption payments are made to investors at less than the amount subscribed (commonly known as the  “negative dividend” issue). Some public unit trusts are also affected by this issue (see ¶24-192). The situation usually arises when the GIF (or public unit trust) elects to use the “slice rule” for determining the tax treatment of the proceeds from the redemption of interests. See ¶24-190. To preserve the available subscribed capital, a GIF deriving Category A income that is not a multi-rate PIE (see ¶29-115) can maintain an available subscribed capital account (ASCA). The ASCA rules also apply to public unit trusts. Specific provisions governing ASCAs are contained in subpart OF of the Income Tax Act 2007. These supplement the general provisions applying to memorandum accounts. Generally, the ASCA is a memorandum account that records the amounts of available subscribed capital contributed by investors but not returned to them on redemption of their interests. The balance in the ASCA can be converted to imputation credits and transferred to the GIF’s imputation credit account at the end of a tax year or when the GIF ceases to operate an imputation credit account. Only an ASCA balance sufficient to meet the debit balance in the GIF’s imputation credit account can be converted and transferred. If a GIF deriving Category A income has never established an ASCA, one may be established upon liquidation by carrying out the calculation in accordance with s OZ 5. In this case, the result of the calculation will be the closing balance of the ASCA. The Commissioner has the power to correct any incorrect or omitted credit or debit entry in the ASCA. In doing so, she must determine the correct debit or credit amount and the date on which the debit or credit should be recorded. The correction is made by giving a notice of a determination. However, failure to give notice does not invalidate a determination. The determination may be given separately or included in a notice of assessment. Unless the determination is challenged, the ASCA must be corrected in accordance with the determination. For discussion on the impact of the ASCA on tax refunds due, see ¶17-105.  Law: IT07 ss BC 7, CD 16, CZ 14, DV 5–DV 7, HD 23, HR 2, HR 3, OA 2(5), OB 19, OB 46, OB 65(2), OF 1–OF 5, OZ 5, OZ 6, YA 1, sch 1 pt A cls 3–6; TAA s 104B  CLUBS, SOCIETIES AND ASSOCIATIONS ¶24-080 Basis of taxation of clubs, societies and associations The definition of a company is very wide and applies to companies incorporated under the Companies Act 1993, unit trusts, incorporated societies and clubs and credit unions registered under the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act 1982. The effect of this definition is that any club, society, association or trade union is liable to be treated for tax purposes as if it were an ordinary company. If the association is not incorporated, it would be taxable as if it were an individual person. There are many special rules that create significant exceptions to this general position. Summary A mutual association is taxed on certain types of transactions pursuant to the special basis of taxation provided for mainly in subpart HE. See ¶24-090. There is a limited concession available to non-profit bodies in the form of a special deduction. Non-profit bodies may claim a deduction for the lesser of $1,000 or the amount that would be the net income of the body but for that section. See ¶24-120. Amounts derived by a friendly society are generally treated as exempt income so long as those amounts are derived within the circle of membership. See ¶24-131. Subpart CW contains a number of other exemptions for various bodies including sporting bodies (¶24-130), racing clubs and certain other racing organisations (¶24-136), scientific or industrial research promoters (¶24-135), district improvement bodies (¶24-137), veterinary services and herd improvement bodies (¶24-139).  It may be a requirement of these exemptions that an organisation’s funds must not be used or be available for use by any member, proprietor, shareholder, or any of their associates, as applicable. Qualifying for an exemption Apart from friendly societies (which are registered under a specified Act), there are three main conditions that an organisation has to meet if it is to qualify for any of the exemptions. First, the Commissioner must consider and approve any application (ie see the rules, certificate of incorporation, etc). Secondly, the main aims and activities of the organisation should meet the specific requirements of the section for which the exemption is requested. Thirdly, no part of the organisation’s income or other funds is to be used or be available for the private use of any member or an associated person of any member. When the club, society or association is unable to attract any of these exemptions, it becomes taxable on the same basis as any other taxpayer. Inland Revenue’s policy on taxation of clubs and societies Inland Revenue has consistently adopted the policy that clubs, societies and other similar non-profit organisations are not required to return as income amounts derived from certain member transactions. These are also known as trading “within the circle of membership” (see ¶24-090). Examples include membership subscriptions or levies. However, income arising from certain transactions with members (such as the sale of trading stock to members or the supply of services) appears to be subject to income tax in the normal way (see IR 9GU, “Clubs or societies return guide”, May 2020 at 15). Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶24-090 Mutual associations Generally speaking, a mutual association is not subject to tax on any profits derived within the circle of the association’s membership.  Therefore, it follows that income from members, in particular subscriptions, is not taxable. This concept is commonly referred to as the mutuality principle. The mutuality principle applies to trading transactions but not to gifts. See Inland Revenue newsletter, AGENTSanswers, June 2003 and October 2003 (the latter discusses allowable deductions for a mutual association), and IR 9GU, “Clubs or societies return guide”, May 2020 at 15. However, the Income Tax Act 2007 overrides the general principle to include in income amounts derived from certain types of member transactions. The effect is that the association is required to include in its income all profits arising from both member and non-member transactions. The mutual association is allowed a deduction for rebates paid to members for their transactions with the association to the extent that those rebates do not exceed the profit attributable to mutual transactions. Mutual transactions Mutual transactions include: ▪ money lending or borrowing transactions between members and the association ▪ for an association that is a statutory producer board, produce transactions and the payment of levies to the statutory producer board by its members. Inland Revenue notes that income from the sale of trading stock and the supply of services to members is subject to tax in IR 9GU, “Clubs or societies return guide”, May 2020 at 15. Rebates paid to members An association rebate is any payment to members by way of distribution of the association’s profits. That distribution must be made no later than six months after the end of the association’s trading year. Cash distributions made by statutory producer boards or co-operative companies are excluded, as are capital distributions on liquidation or emigration and payments corresponding to notional  distributions. Subject to an appropriate election being made, these amounts are treated as dividends with imputation credits attached. Deductions The amount an association is allowed to deduct against the income deemed to have been derived from mutual transactions is expressed as a formula. The allowable deduction is the lesser of: ▪ the total rebates paid to members for their transactions with the association in that income year (only rebates arising in relation to mutual transactions are taken into account for these purposes — rebates are calculated by reference to the amounts of the mutual transactions, irrespective of whether the rebate is reduced or limited by the member’s capital contribution), and ▪ income from mutual transactions less deductions relating to that income and distributions in accordance with s OB 82(1)(a) (cash distributions by a co-operative company with imputation credits attached). Apportionment In making her determination as to the profits attributable to the mutual transactions, the Commissioner may apportion any expenditure or loss incurred by the association in the income year between member transactions and non-member transactions. Rebate deemed not to be a bonus issue An incorporated association may satisfy its obligation to pay a rebate by issuing fully paid-up or partly paid-up shares, or by giving credit in respect of those shares. In such a case, that rebate is not deemed to be a bonus issue. Demutualisation Upon the demutualisation of a mutual association, members generally exchange the rights they hold in the mutual association for rights as shareholders in a company. Ordinarily, this would create  shareholder continuity issues for the purposes of the net loss carryforward and imputation rules. However, provision is made by s YC 17 for the demutualisation of insurers to preserve imputation credits and losses for carry-forward where existing members exchange their rights for shares. Rebates in the hands of members Rebates that relate to business transactions between the member and the association are treated as income in the hands of the member. If, however, the transactions or any part of them relate to non-business activities, rebates for such activities are not income. Where a rebate or any part of a rebate exceeds the profit attributable to the member’s transactions with the association, the amount of the excess is treated as a dividend to the member and as such is required to be included in his or her income. Law: IT07 ss CB 33, CB 34, DV 19, HE 1–HE 5, YA 1, YC 17  ¶24-120 Non-profit organisations Non-profit organisations are subject to income tax, unless there is a specific exemption available. However, some non-profit bodies are entitled to a deduction for the lesser of $1,000 or the amount that would be the net income of the body but for that concession. This deduction is allowed to: ▪ an organisation that is not carried on for the purposes of profit to any proprietor, member or shareholder, and ▪ an organisation that has a constitution prohibiting any distribution of money or property to any proprietor, member or shareholder. The deduction is available to both incorporated and unincorporated organisations, such as: ▪ associations established for community purposes not falling within the exemption for charitable organisations ▪ trade associations  ▪ progressive associations ▪ political parties ▪ social clubs, and ▪ sporting clubs that do not come within the exemption for amateur sporting bodies. (The exemption for sporting clubs is considered further at ¶24-130.) Law: IT07 s DV 8  ¶24-130 Sports clubs Amounts derived by any club, society, association or trustee or trustees of a trust (the promoter) established mainly to promote any amateur game or sport, for the recreation or entertainment of the general public, are treated as exempt income. The requirements that must be satisfied before the exemption is available are that the promoter must be established mainly for the purpose of promoting any amateur game or sport and that the game or sport must be conducted for the recreation or entertainment of the general public and no part of the income or funds of the promoter may be available to be used for the private pecuniary profit of any proprietor, member, shareholder or beneficiary. In reviewing what the main purpose of a sports club might be, the Commissioner would look to all the surrounding circumstances, including the promoter’s constitution or trust deed and activities carried on for a particular tax year. Qualifying pastimes Virtually any pastime will qualify providing all the conditions listed above are met. District and national wrestling/boxing associations, clubs and associations connected with amateur cricket, tennis, golf, rugby, rugby league and association football would all qualify, as would dance, cultural, car, chess, gun, art and craft and music clubs. A club that also has professional activities could still qualify so long as Inland Revenue is satisfied the club is promoting amateur games  or sport and the club’s share of any professional event is used to promote the amateur games or sport. Fringe benefit tax Even though a sports club enjoys a concession for income tax purposes, it is still required to file fringe benefit tax returns and account for fringe benefit tax if it provides benefits for employees. This would be the case, for instance, if an employee of a sports club used the club’s motor vehicle for private purposes. See ¶21-010 et seq. Law: IT07 s CW 46  ¶24-131 Friendly societies Amounts derived by a friendly society, except for income from a business carried on outside its circle of membership, are treated as exempt income. Deciding a particular organisation is a friendly society depends on whether it is registered under the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act 1982. Interest and rental income from a friendly society investment is usually tax exempt. However, if the society is clearly making a business of renting or leasing premises, any income would be taxable as business income. Example: Equity payments received and invested by a union over a number of years were held by the Court of Appeal to be exempt from income tax. The payments were not derived from “business carried on”. See C of IR v Port Chalmers Waterfront Workers Union (1996) 17 NZTC 12,523 (CA).  Credit unions A credit union is included in the definition of “friendly society”. Such organisations are therefore exempt from tax except for any income derived from business carried on beyond its circle of membership. Any payments made to a member of the credit union are taxed in the member’s hands. Payments made to members are treated as  interest and not dividends. Accordingly, these payments are deductible to the union. This tax treatment is largely historical. Law: IT07 ss CW 44, YA 1  ¶24-132 Community housing trusts and companies A tax exemption exists for income derived by community housing entities (trustees or companies) whose activities involve the provision of housing or housing assistance. The exemption for an eligible community housing entity is intended to apply to all income derived by the entity, not simply the income derived from the entity’s housing activity. Requirements To benefit from the exemption, the community housing entity must be a registered community housing provider under the Public and Community Housing Management Act 1992 (formerly the Housing Restructuring and Tenancy Matters Act 1992), and it must ensure that its activities are not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual, and all profits are retained, or distributed or applied to specific classes of recipients. The class of recipients includes other community housing entities, beneficiaries or clients of the entity, tax charities and persons to whom distributions would be in accordance with charitable purposes. Control test In addition to the above, no person with some control over the activities must be able to divert amounts for the benefit or advantage of: ▪ if the entity (the operating entity) is carrying on the activities for or for the benefit of a community housing entity or charity (the controlling entity), a person other than the operating entity or the controlling entity except for a purpose of either entity or for a charitable purpose, or  ▪ in any other case, a person other than the entity except for a purpose of the entity or a charitable purpose. A person is treated as having some control and being able to divert amounts if they satisfy the criteria in s CW 42(5) and (6), discussed in ¶24-210. Note that issues with the application of a previous control test were identified where wholly-owned subsidiaries carried out the activities (see ¶24-210), but retrospective amendments were made to ensure that when a community housing entity is itself a wholly-owned subsidiary of a charitable trust or another community housing entity, the wholly-owned subsidiary is eligible for the community housing entity tax exemption. A similar amendment was made for subsidiaries of other charitable entities (see ¶24-210) and tertiary education institutions (see ¶24-275). Exclusions An entity will not be a community housing entity if: ▪ more than 15% of the people who become beneficiaries or clients of the entity on or after 14 April 2014 have income or assets exceeding a value (the entry threshold) set out in sch 34, or ▪ the provision of housing or housing assistance to those people with income or assets not exceeding the entry threshold is substantially different from that provided to those who do exceed the threshold. Whether a person has income or assets that exceed the entry threshold is determined on the date, they become a beneficiary or client of the entity. Income threshold Schedule 34 provides that the income threshold is set at $85,000 for an individual and $130,000 for a group of applicants, eg a couple. If a person carries on a business, their income will be their net income  from their business for the previous 12 months. In other cases, it will be the assessable income derived in the previous 12 months. Asset threshold There is no asset test for first home buyers. For others, the threshold asset value is set at $120,000 if the proposed purchase is of land in Auckland, $100,000 if the purchase is in Hamilton City, Tauranga City, Western Bay of Plenty District, Kapiti Coast District, Porirua City, Upper Hutt City, Hutt City, Wellington City, Nelson City, Tasman District, Waimakariri District, Christchurch City, Selwyn District or Queenstown Lakes District, and $80,000 for any other area in New Zealand. A person’s asset value is defined as the total value of property owned by the person that is available to the person for the purchase of land and is: ▪ money in a bank account, including a fixed or term deposit ▪ a share, stock or bond ▪ an investment in a bank or financial institution ▪ money paid to, or held by, a real estate agent or solicitor as a deposit in the purchase of a home ▪ a boat or caravan with a value of more than $5,000 ▪ a vehicle not being used as a usual method of transport ▪ an asset of another type, with a value of more than $5,000. Section 225D of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides for the Governor-General to make regulations, on the combined recommendation of the Minister of Revenue and the Minister of Housing, amending the income and assets threshold values set out in sch 34. Law: IT07 ss CW 42B, LD 3(2)(ac), sch 34; TAA s 225D  ¶24-133 Community trusts Exemption Any amount derived by the trustee of a community trust is exempt from income tax. A community trust is defined in s 4 of the Community Trusts Act 1999 as a community trust established under Pt 2 of the Trustee Banks Restructuring Act 1988 to acquire the shares in the capital of a trustee bank’s successor company and for the purposes specified in the Community Trusts Act. The exemption is intended to reduce compliance costs previously incurred by community trusts in ensuring that distributions made to tax-exempt entities were not subject to income tax and that distributions made to taxable beneficiaries were covered by tax credits (such as imputation credits) received by the community trusts. Distributions Distributions from community trusts are not taxed as beneficiary income but are instead included in the income of the recipient by virtue of ss CV 14 and HC 21. This is with the exception of the following amounts, all of which may be distributed tax free: ▪ trustee income derived in or before the 2003–04 income year ▪ capital gains derived by the trustee ▪ corpus of the trust, and ▪ amounts received by a community trust in the 2004–05 or 2005– 06 income years upon the winding up of a charitable subsidiary or sub-trust. The distributions are not beneficiary income. By definition, beneficiary income must first be income derived by a trustee. Because income derived by a trustee of a community trust is exempt income, it is not assessable income. Further, the distributions are not taxable distributions. Taxable distributions are only relevant in the  context of foreign trusts and non-complying trusts. For more on beneficiary income and taxable distributions, see ¶25-065 and ¶25305. Because a community trust is a purpose trust, it does not have beneficiaries. It follows that such trusts are not affected by the associated persons rules dealing with beneficiaries. Distributions from community trusts continue to be exempt in the hands of tax-exempt persons and taxable at the appropriate marginal rates of tax in other cases. Persons liable for tax must account for their own tax on distributions rather than the trustee of the community trust being accountable for the tax as agent. Note also that imputation credits will not be available for attaching to distributions made. This is because the distributions are not beneficiary income (which retains the same character as when the income was derived by the trustee) but constitute a new category of income to which imputation credits do not automatically attach. Law: IT07 ss CV 14, CW 52, HC 21, HD 12(1), YA 1  ¶24-134 Funeral expenses funds and sickness, accident or death benefit funds Funeral expenses funds Interest or dividend income derived after 25 November 2003 by any trustee in trust for certain employer funds is exempt from income tax. The exemption applies if all of the following criteria are met: ▪ the sole purpose of the fund is the payment of the funeral expenses of employees, their spouses, civil union partners, de facto partners and dependants or surviving spouses, civil union partners, de facto partners and surviving dependants of deceased employees ▪ the employer has at least 10 employees ▪ all persons eligible for benefits from the fund have equal eligibility  ▪ no contributions to the fund are made by a person who is not the employer or an employee, and ▪ the fund is approved by the Commissioner. Sickness, accident or death benefit funds The income tax exemption for income derived by a trustee in trust for any sickness, accident or death benefit fund was repealed from 25 November 2003 (see former s CB 5(1)(i) of the Income Tax Act 1994). The removal of this exemption raised the possible compliance costs of certain funds that had mutuality characteristics that resembled a friendly society (an entity exempt from income tax, see ¶24-131). To relieve this cost, an income tax exemption continues to be available under s CZ 18 of the Income Tax Act 2007 to a person who was an incorporated body or a trustee, provided health insurance, accident insurance, life insurance or other health and welfare benefits to natural persons, and was approved by the Commissioner on or before 24 November 2003. Law: IT07 ss CW 45, CZ 18  ¶24-135 Scientific or industrial research promoters Amounts derived by a society or an association established mainly to promote or encourage scientific or industrial research are treated as exempt income. The promoter must be approved by the Royal Society of New Zealand and none of the amounts derived must be used or be available for use for the private pecuniary profit of a member, proprietor, shareholder or any associates. Crown Research Institutes are excluded from this exemption. Law: IT07 s CW 49  ¶24-136 Racing clubs and organisations Amounts derived by most racing clubs are exempt income provided that members of the club are not able to use the club’s funds for their own private profit-making purposes. The income of the following  organisations is also exempt: New Zealand Thoroughbred Racing, TAB NZ (before 1 August 2020, the Racing Industry Transition Agency), Harness Racing New Zealand and the New Zealand Greyhound Racing Association. Law: IT07 s CW 47  ¶24-137 District improvement bodies Amounts derived by any society or association established mainly to advertise, beautify or develop any city, borough or other district to attract trade, tourists, visitors or population or to create, increase, expand or develop amenities for the general public in a city or district are treated as exempt income. The society’s income or other funds cannot be used or be available for use for anything that is not a charitable purpose. To qualify as charitable, the organisation’s aims must generally be for the public good and the benefit must be available to a large part of the community. See ¶24-240. A club or association of a certain interest group would generally not qualify because it would not benefit the public. There is a specific exemption for income derived by the trustees of Auckland’s Cornwall Park from the property of the trust. Amounts derived by a council-controlled organisation, or a local authority from a council-controlled organisation, are specifically excluded from the exemption. Law: IT07 s CW 40  ¶24-139 Veterinary services and herd improvement bodies Income derived by any veterinary club, society or association established mainly to promote efficient veterinary services in New Zealand is exempt, provided its funds are not used or available for use for members’ private profit-making purposes. Income derived by the Veterinary Council of New Zealand is also exempt. Equally, income derived by a herd improvement society or association established mainly to promote the improvement of the standard of  dairy cattle in New Zealand is exempt, provided funds are not used for the private pecuniary profit of its members. Law: IT07 ss CW 50, CW 51  STATUTORY PRODUCER BOARDS AND COOPERATIVES ¶24-140 Statutory producer boards A “statutory producer board” is included in the definition of a company, and its activity treated as a business. The term “statutory producer board” encompasses the following bodies: ▪ New Zealand Horticulture Export Authority ▪ New Zealand Meat Board ▪ New Zealand Pork Industry Board ▪ marketing authorities established by regulation pursuant to the Primary Products Marketing Act 1953, and ▪ primary producer boards and marketing boards established under any Act. Levies received by a statutory producer board are, except for those charged for capital development, deemed to be income. Deduction for expenditure The general permission in s DA 1 applies to expenditure incurred by the board in fulfilling its functions as if the expenditure were incurred in the derivation of assessable income or in the carrying on of a business by the board. Association rebates A statutory producer board is also an “association” within the meaning given to that term in s YA 1. See ¶24-090. Consequently, it  is permitted a deduction of the aggregate of the amount of rebates paid to members for their transactions with the board during the year. A statutory producer board may claim the deduction either for the income year in which the rebates are paid or for the income year in which the transactions giving rise to the rebates took place. Rebates that relate to business transactions between the member and the association are included as income in the hands of the member. If, however, the transactions or any part of them relate to non-business activities, rebates for such activities are not liable for tax. Where a rebate or any part of a rebate exceeds the profit attributable to the member’s transactions with the association, the amount of the excess is treated as a dividend to the member and liable to tax in his or her hands. See further at ¶24-090. Law: IT07 ss CB 34, CV 5, DV 19, YA 1, sch 37  ¶24-150 Statutory producer boards — imputation A statutory producer board may make a distribution to members by way of rebate or in one of two other ways. The first is a nondeductible cash distribution based on levies payable by members or on member transactions. This is taxed as a dividend. The second is a notional distribution (similar to a taxable bonus issue) again based on produce transactions and levies payable by members. If the board makes a notional distribution, it is subsequently allowed to distribute a tax-free cash distribution based on the notional amount. See s CD 33. Section CD 33 applies to cash distributions based on current year trading activities with members and shareholders, ie the produce activities in the year to which the distribution relates. A member includes any person who is required to pay a levy to the statutory producer board or who during that year supplies produce or goods to the board in respect of its primary statutory functions. If the statutory producer board is an imputation credit account company, it may attach imputation credits to both cash and notional distributions. If imputation credits are attached to a notional distribution, the distribution will be a dividend. It should be noted that  a rebate for the purposes of s DV 19 excludes distributions to which an imputation credit is attached by a statutory producer board or cooperative. See ¶24-090. Imputation credits allocated to cash distributions The allocation of imputation credits to cash distributions must be done in accordance with the formulae in s OB 73. These formulae determine the sum total of imputation credits to be attached for the benefit of all members and the proportionate share of that total to be allocated to each member. Notification of the election to attach imputation credits to a cash distribution must be made within the time for filing the tax return. Imputation credits attached to notional distributions The amount of imputation credits to be attached to a notional distribution is calculated under one of four alternatives: ▪ a formula based on member produce transactions ▪ a formula relating to member levies ▪ partly in accordance with both produce transactions and levies, or ▪ in such other manner as the Commissioner may approve. The amount of the dividend derived by each member is the amount calculated under the formula in s OB 75. The effect of this formula is to exclude the amount of the imputation credit from the calculation of the notional dividend. The imputation credit is treated as being a part of the dividend and is assessable in the same way as all other imputation credits. This treatment ensures that the imputation credits attached to notional distributions made by statutory producer boards (and co-operative companies, see ¶24-160) can be used by the recipients of the distributions. Details of the deemed dividend paid must be provided to the Commissioner with the tax return for the income year in which the determination is made.  Law: IT07 ss CD 6(3), CD 13, CD 33(1), DV 18, OB 73–OB 77, YA 1  ¶24-160 Co-operative companies Co-operative companies are taxed in the same way as mutual associations, ie amounts derived from member and non-member transactions are included as income with a corresponding deduction allowed for certain rebates paid to certain members. See ¶24-090. Co-operatives that are imputation credit account companies may allocate imputation credits to cash distributions and to notional distributions in the same way as statutory producer boards. See ¶24150. With effect from 26 June 2019, it has been clarified that a cooperative company may elect to make a fully imputed cash distribution of profits attributable to a specific group of shareholders of the company, provided: ▪ the company’s constitution permits distributions to be made to a specific group of members, and ▪ the amount paid to each shareholder is determined by the level of trading activity between the members and the company. This permits a co-operative company to choose to distribute profits attributable to a specific group to that group as either a tax deductible association rebate or a non-deductible fully imputed cash distribution, which is treated as a dividend. Imputation credits may be attached to non-rebate cash distributions or non-cash notional distributions, which are deemed to be dividends and income in the recipients’ hands. Should the co-operative company make any further distribution out of the source of a notional distribution, that distribution is excluded from the dividends concept. The tax-free portion may be based on the current year trading activities with shareholders, ie the produce activities in the year to which the cash distribution relates.  A co-operative company that is a Māori authority may attach Māori authority credits to cash distributions and notional distributions in the same way as imputation credits may be attached to such distributions. See ¶24-324. Law: IT07 ss CD 6(4), CD 13, CD 33(2), DV 18, OB 78–OB 82  UNIT TRUSTS ¶24-190 Unit trusts A unit trust is deemed to be a company for tax purposes. The unit holder is deemed to be a shareholder, the units are deemed to be shares and distributions are deemed to be dividends. A “unit trust” is defined as being any scheme or arrangement that is made for the purpose of, or has the effect of, providing facilities for the participation by the subscribers, purchasers or contributors in the income and gains earned by the trust. That income may be of a capital or revenue nature, and the subscribers must participate in it as beneficiaries under a trust. Certain arrangements are expressly excluded from this definition: ▪ a trust for the benefit of debenture holders ▪ the Common Fund of Public Trust or any group investment fund established by Public Trust ▪ the Common Fund of the Māori Trustee ▪ a group investment fund established under the Trustees Companies Act 1967 ▪ a registered friendly society ▪ a superannuation fund ▪ an employee share purchase scheme  ▪ a funeral trust, and ▪ any other trust declared by the Governor-General by Order in Council not to be a unit trust for the purposes of s HD 13 (trustee as agent of unit trust). The essential notion of the unit trust concept is that the scheme or arrangement must be in the nature of a trust. The concept would not therefore apply to a partnership, syndicate or joint venture. In these instances, the participants in the arrangement directly manage and control the undertaking. Many small investment clubs would also not be regarded as unit trusts. Single unit holder In August 2016, the Commissioner released an interpretation statement, IS 16/02, “Income tax — Unit trusts — when a unit trust can have a single unit holder” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 8, September 2016 at 2). The Commissioner’s view is that a trust with a single subscriber, purchaser or contributor can be within the definition of “unit trust” in the Income Tax Act 2007. The item concludes that the “unit trust” definition requires only that the trust scheme or arrangement is “made for the purpose” or “has the effect” of providing facilities for multiple unit holders. This is to be determined by considering the legal relationships governing the trust — most importantly, the trust deed. The view taken in this statement differs from the Commissioner’s previously published position set out in the commentary to BR Pub 95/5A: “Relationship between the ‘unit trust’ and ‘qualifying trust’ definitions”, which stated that to be a “unit trust” for income tax purposes required more than one unit holder (discussed below). The Commissioner also released an operational position (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 8, September 2016 at 17) that stated she would apply the following transitional operational position for those taxpayers that had been affected by the change in the Commissioner’s position:  ▪ Trusts that had only one unit holder, but still had facilities in the trust deed for multiple unit holders, and that had been applying the trust rules had until 31 March 2018 to either: □ transition to applying the “unit trust” provisions, or □ if they wished to continue being treated as a trust, amend their trust deed/documents to ensure they were not a “unit trust”. ▪ Trusts that had taken the view that there was a “unit trust” because the trust deed provided facilities for multiple unit holders, even though there was only a single unit holder, are now in line with the Commissioner’s view. Unit trust versus complying trust In some cases, a unit trust may also fall within the definition of a complying trust under subpart HC. In public binding rulings BR Pub 95/5 and BR Pub 95/5A (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 5, November 1995 at 5 and Vol 8, No 10, December 1996 at 15 respectively), the Commissioner set out the relationship between unit trusts and qualifying trusts (now complying trusts). Where a trust falls within both definitions, the unit trust rules prevail. See s HC 1(2)(a). BR Pub 95/5A (which replaced BR Pub 95/5) expired at the end of the 1999–2000 income year and was not renewed. However, the Commissioner’s view on the subject is unchanged. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 5, May 2000 at 4. Family trusts do not come within the unit trust regime since beneficiaries do not subscribe, purchase or contribute for their entitlement to distributions from the trust. However, some family trading trusts that provide for settlors to benefit in a fixed way might come within the unit trust definition. Unit trusts and imputation Tax paid by the unit trust is credited to the imputation credit account and resident unit holders are entitled to imputation credits to the extent to which they are allocated to income distributions. Where  units are redeemed, a debit will arise to the imputation credit account if the circumstances in s OB 45 (or s OP 45 in the case of consolidated imputation groups) apply. See further at ¶17-045. When the manager of a unit trust (or a person nominated by the manager) redeems units from unit holders in the ordinary course of business, the dividend derived does not include any imputation credits attached to the dividend to the extent it constitutes a recovery of the purchase price. See s CD 16 and ¶16-630. Redemption of units An amount paid by the manager of a unit trust upon the redemption of a unit may not be a dividend. Like companies, unlisted unit trusts (and group investment funds) must apply either the ordering rule or the slice rule to ascertain the amount of available subscribed capital that may be attributed to a redeemed unit, and therefore be excluded from being a dividend. Since 1 April 1996, unlisted unit trusts (and GIFs) have had the option of issuing units on the basis that the ordering rule under s CD 22(2) will not apply to their cancellation or redemption. (Any units issued before that date were deemed to be issued on terms that their redemption was to be subject to the ordering rule, unless the manager elected before 31 March 1996 for those units to be redeemed under the slice rule. See s CZ 13.) Broadly, when the “ordering” rule applies to a redemption, the proceeds from the redemption are taken first from the available subscribed capital of the particular class of unit being redeemed. To the extent that there is sufficient available subscribed capital for the class of units and one of the bright line tests in s CD 22(3) is met, the proceeds of the redemption will not be a dividend. On the other hand, if the “slice” rule in s CD 22(4) is applied, that part of the redemption that does not exceed the available “subscribed capital per share” (rather than the “subscribed capital per share cancelled”, as applies in the ordering rule) is excluded from tax. There is no requirement for the bright line tests in s CD 22(3) to be met when the slice rule is applied. For further discussion of the application of the ordering rule and the slice rule see ¶16-770.  For further detailed commentary on the taxation of unit trusts, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 9, February 1996 at 7. See also “Corporate tax regime for unit trusts now permanent” by Tony Lines in CCH, New Zealand Tax Planning Report, No 1, March 1996 at 5. Qualifying company regime Unit trusts did not qualify for the qualifying company regime. See s HA 2. Companies can no longer elect to be qualifying companies for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2011. See ¶19-010. Bonus issues by foreign unit trusts In relation to unit trusts that are foreign companies, a bonus issue made to a unit holder is a taxable bonus issue if the bonus issue is made instead of causing a beneficial interest in money or property of the unit trust to vest absolutely in the unit holder. See ¶16-573. Solicitors’ nominee company The Commissioner will not normally treat a solicitors’ nominee company as a unit trust. This practice applies providing the company adopts the draft memorandum of association formulated by the Law Society for nominee companies. Law: IT07 ss CD 10, CD 16, CD 22, CZ 13, HA 2, HC 1(2)(a), HD 13, OB 45, OP 45, YA 1  ¶24-192 Public unit trusts In general terms, public unit trusts are unit trusts that meet certain criteria and include retail unit trusts (whose units are offered to the public and that have a hundred or more unit holders) and certain wholesale unit trusts (whose units are held by widely held investment vehicles such as other unit trusts or superannuation funds). For the purposes of determining the number of unit holders and other percentage interests referred to in the definition, persons associated with one another are treated as one person. To reduce the compliance costs of determining whether unit holders are associated, unit holders must disclose their associations to the trustee upon application by the trustee. The trustee is entitled to rely  on the disclosure unless there are reasonable grounds for believing the disclosure is not correct. More specifically, a public unit trust is defined in s YA 1 as a unit trust that fulfils one of the following conditions: ▪ the unit trust meets the following criteria: □ before 24 February 2016, the unit trust makes regulated offers under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 (FMCA), and □ the unit trust has 100 or more unit holders (associated persons being treated as one person), and □ the unit holders are: — unit trust managers who hold units in the ordinary course of their activities for the unit trust — persons with an interest of 25% or less (associated persons being treated as one person), or — persons with an interest of 25% or more (associated persons being treated as one person) if a person’s interest is 25% or more because of unusual or temporary circumstances such as the recent establishment or forthcoming termination of the unit trust (as defined), or ▪ the unit trust has unit holders who are any one or more of the following: □ a public unit trust (as defined) □ a group investment fund □ a life insurance company □ a superannuation fund  □ a unit trust manager, a trustee, or a person nominated by the manager or the trustee, who holds units in the ordinary course of management activities for the unit trust □ before 24 February 2016, a person with an interest of 25% or less (associated persons being treated as one person) if regulated offers are made under the FMCA □ before 24 February 2016, a person with an interest of 25% or more (associated persons being treated as one person) if the person’s interest is 25% or more because of unusual or temporary circumstances, such as the recent establishment or forthcoming termination of the unit trust (as defined), and if regulated offers are made under the FMCA □ from 24 February 2016, a person with an interest of 5% or less in the unit trust, treating all associated persons as one person □ from 24 February 2016, a person with an interest of 5% or more in the unit trust, treating all associated persons as one person, if their interest is 5% or more because of unusual or temporary circumstances, such as the recent establishment or forthcoming termination of the unit trust, and if the unit trust would meet the requirements of any of the other paragraphs of the definition, or ▪ the unit trust has fewer than 100 unit holders if: □ the unit trust could reasonably be regarded as a widely-held investment vehicle for direct investment by members of the public despite the lesser number of unit holders, or □ the existence of fewer than 100 unit holders is caused by unusual or temporary circumstances, such as the recent establishment or forthcoming termination of the unit trust, being a public unit trust (as defined), or  □ the unit trust could reasonably be regarded as a vehicle primarily for investment by widely-held vehicles for direct investment, being either unit trusts, group investment funds (GIFs), life insurance companies, superannuation funds or, from 18 March 2019, portfolio investment entities. Transfer of expenditure Unit trusts investing in other unit trusts or GIFs incur expenditure on administration and management and receive their only income in the form of dividends that are usually fully imputed. Unless the unit trust has income from another source, such as interest, so that the imputation credits can be utilised, the unit trust accumulates excess credits or losses (if the unit trust converts the credits to losses) that it cannot use. Sections DV 5 and DV 6 allow public unit trusts to utilise those imputation credits without the need to enter into arrangements to ensure they have income streams to absorb the excess credits. Public unit trusts (defined as “member funds”) that invest in other public unit trusts or GIFs deriving category A income (defined as “master funds”) can elect to transfer expenditure to that master fund. As noted above, a “public unit trust” includes a retail or wholesale unit trust that meets certain criteria. All expenditure can be transferred, other than expenditure that is revenue account property and expenditure on a financial arrangement. (However, expenditure on a financial arrangement that is denominated in New Zealand dollars and for which expenditure is allocated using the yield to maturity method can be transferred.) The master fund is able to deduct the expenditure and the expenditure is treated as not having been incurred by the member fund. The master fund cannot deduct more than its taxable income for the year in which the income is transferred, less all non-resident passive income derived by the master fund in that year. (This formula does not apply to an amount of expenditure that is transferred to a master fund that is a multi-rate PIE.) Expenditure that cannot be deducted by the master fund may be carried forward by the member fund as loss balance and transferred to the master fund in a later year. If, after the date it has filed its return, the master fund is able to deduct more  than the amount actually deducted, the Commissioner may allow a member fund to transfer expenditure to the extent of the difference to the master fund after the return has been filed. A master fund that is a multi-rate PIE is allowed a deduction for expenditure transferred from a member fund. However, the amount transferred must not be more than the member fund’s share of the multi-rate PIE’s taxable income. The member fund and the master fund must agree that the expenditure be transferred to the master fund and expenditure may only be transferred to the extent that the member fund has a tax loss. For expenditure to be transferred, the member fund must have funds invested in the master fund at all times between the date on which the member fund incurs the expenditure and the last day of the tax year in which the expenditure is deducted by the master fund. In the income year in which the member fund stops investing in the master fund, neither the member fund nor the master fund can deduct the expenditure, and the member fund must treat the expenditure as a loss balance. Any amount paid to the member fund by the master fund for the expenditure transferred is not income or a dividend for tax purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 11, November 2001 at 39. The expenditure transferred gives rise to a credit in the master fund’s imputation credit account on 31 March of the tax year in which the expenditure is deducted. Similarly, the expenditure transferred gives rise to a debit in the member fund’s imputation credit account on 31 March of the tax year in which the expenditure is transferred. If the debit to the member fund’s imputation credit account in these circumstances results in a debit balance, there is no requirement to pay further income tax on the debit arising on transfer of the expenditure. See s OB 65(2). Shareholder continuity In determining the shareholder continuity of a public unit trust, if a public unit trust so chooses then all unit holders are treated as a notional single person that is not a company, exists as long as the unit trust exists and holds nothing other than the shares in the unit  trust. This means that the public unit trust need not keep track of the unit-holding changes. A taxpayer who is, directly or indirectly, wholly or partially owned by a public unit trust may choose not to apply the look-through rule in s YC 4 and to treat the public unit trust as applying the notional single person concession without the public trust having to separately choose to apply it. Available subscribed capital accounts Like GIFs, public unit trusts were also affected by the “negative dividend” issue. To remedy this, a public unit trust that is not a multirate PIE (see ¶29-115) may establish an available subscribed capital account (ASCA). For further detail on the ASCA, see ¶24-070 (references to a “GIF” should be read as references to a “public unit trust”). Law: IT07 ss DV 5–DV 7, IA 2(4)(a), IA 7(4), OB 19, OB 46, OB 65(2), YA 1, YC 12; TAA s 32D  CHARITIES ¶24-195 Registration requirements for charities ▸ Note: In December 2019, Inland Revenue released a draft operational statement in two parts: ▪ ED0207a, “Charities and donee organisations: Part 1: Charities”, and ▪ ED0207b, “Charities and donee organisations: Part 2: Donee organisations” (see ¶11-055), which sets out how Inland Revenue and Charities Services (formerly the Charities Commission) will monitor and advise charitable entities of the requirements for income tax exemption and donee status. ED0207a and ED0207b provide guidance to charities on their tax obligations and the tax exemptions available to them, including:  ▪ charitable registration requirements and obligations ▪ qualifying for income tax exemptions ▪ how other tax rules such as GST, FBT, etc apply to charities ▪ non-resident charities, and ▪ specific tax treatment relating to Māori charities. The draft statement also addresses other tax matters relevant to charities, such as recordkeeping and the implications of being deregistered from the Charities Register. The draft operational statement is intended to replace OS 06/02, “Interaction of tax and charities rules”, when signed. Income tax exemptions Charities that meet certain requirements may benefit from income tax exemptions. There are three categories of exempt income that relate to amounts derived by a charity. These are: ▪ income derived by trustees in trust for charitable purposes or by any society or institution established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes provided that the charity is a tax charity (see below and ¶24-240) ▪ income derived by a business carried on for charitable purposes, or for business income derived by or on behalf of or for the benefit of any society or institution established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes (see ¶24-200), and ▪ income derived by an executor or administrator from funds held in trust for charitable purposes (charitable bequests — s CW 43). The first two categories of exempt income listed above require the relevant charity to be a “tax charity”. This is defined to mean:  ▪ a trustee, a society, or an institution registered as a charitable entity under the Charities Act 2005 ▪ a trustee, a society, or an institution that, before 1 July 2008, has started to take reasonable steps in the process of registration under the Charities Act, intends to complete that process and has not been advised by Inland Revenue (IR) that it is not a tax charity ▪ a trustee, a society, or an institution that is a non-resident and carries out its charitable purposes outside New Zealand and that the Commissioner approves as a tax charity in circumstances where registration as a charitable entity is not available, and ▪ persons removed from the register, for the period from when they are first registered to the later of the day they stop complying with the rules and the day of final decision (see below). Eligibility for registration To be eligible for registration, a charitable entity must satisfy the following conditions: ▪ for trustees of a trust, the trust is of a kind in relation to which an amount of income is derived by the trustees in trust for charitable purposes ▪ for a society or an institution, the society or institution is established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes, and it is not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual ▪ the entity has a name that complies with certain conditions (see below), and ▪ all of the officers of the entity are qualified to be officers of a charitable entity (see below).  The trustees of a trust are treated as complying with the registration requirements for income (ie charitable income is derived) if: ▪ in accordance with a binding ruling made under Pt 5A of the Tax Administration Act 1994, the income derived by the trust is treated as exempt income for income tax purposes, or ▪ the income derived by trustees is deemed to be derived in trust for charitable purposes under s 24B of the Māori Trust Boards Act 1955. Similarly, a society or an institution is treated as being established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes and not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual if it is treated this way for income tax purposes in accordance with a binding ruling. The effect of the binding ruling for registration purposes continues until the binding ruling expires or ceases to apply. A trust is not prevented from being registered because the trust has not yet derived income for charitable purposes, if the Charities Registration Board is of the opinion that income will be derived by the trustees in trust for charitable purposes and it is fit and proper to register the trust as a charitable entity. In reaching its opinion, the Board may act on the basis of any reasonable assumptions concerning the future derivation of income for charitable purposes. An example is given in the legislation, see s 14 of the Charities Act. Name requirements The name of the entity must satisfy one of the criteria set out below: ▪ the entity is incorporated under that name under one of the following Acts: □ the Incorporated Societies Act 1908 □ the Charitable Trusts Act 1957, or □ the Companies Act 1993  ▪ the entity is established or constituted by an Act under that name, or ▪ in the opinion of the Board, the name is not offensive or liable to mislead the public. Officers of charitable entities Certain persons are disqualified from being officers of a charitable entity. Briefly, they are: ▪ undischarged bankrupts ▪ persons under 16 years of age ▪ individuals who, or body corporates that, have been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty or tax evasion and have been sentenced for that crime within the last seven years ▪ individuals who are prohibited from being a director or promoter of, or being concerned or taking part in the management of, an incorporated or unincorporated body under the Companies Act, the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013, or the Takeovers Act 1993 ▪ individuals who, or body corporates that, are disqualified from being an officer of a charitable entity ▪ individuals who are subject to a property order or whose property is managed by a trustee corporation under the Protection of Personal and Property Rights Act 1988 ▪ body corporates that are being wound up, are in liquidation or receivership or are subject to statutory management, and ▪ individuals or body corporates of the entity that do not comply with any qualifications for officers contained in the rules of that entity.  The Board may waive any of the disqualifying factors listed above, except for the last one. The waiver must be in writing and may be subject to terms or conditions. The waiver may also be varied or revoked at any time. Registration An application for registration as a charitable entity must satisfy the following conditions: ▪ it is in the prescribed form ▪ it is accompanied by: □ a document in the prescribed form, signed by, or on behalf of, every officer of the entity, that contains a certification that the officer is not disqualified from being an officer of a charitable entity (see above under the sub-heading “Officers of charitable entities”) □ a copy of the rules of the entity, and □ the prescribed fee for the application, and ▪ it contains, or is accompanied by, any other prescribed information or documentation. The Board is required to consider the application for registration and may request further information or documentation be provided within 20 working days of the request. The Board must give the applicant notice of any matter that might lead to the Board declining the application and the applicant has 20 working days, or longer period the Board agrees to on request by the applicant, to make submissions on the matter. An application will be treated as withdrawn if the applicant does not adequately respond to a request for information or to make submissions within the relevant period. If the Board is satisfied that the entity is qualified to be registered as a charitable entity, the Board must register the entity as a charitable entity, allocate a registration number and notify the entity of its registration and number. Alternatively, the Board must notify the  entity of its decision not to register the entity as charitable and the reasons why. Registration may be backdated Registration as a charitable entity may be backdated if the Board is satisfied that the entity was qualified for registration as a charitable entity at all times during the period between the effective registration time and the time that the entity actually became registered as a charitable entity. The effective date of registration cannot be earlier than: ▪ in the case of a charitable trust, or charitable society or institution created or established by a gift made after 1 February 2007 and that was exempt from gift duty, the time that the gift was made, and ▪ in any other case, the time the Board received a properly completed application for registration as a charitable entity. The backdating of registration applies for the purposes of the Charities Act, the Income Tax Act and the Estate and Gift Duties Act 1968. Operational statement In November 2006, IR released an operational statement OS 06/02, “Interaction of tax and charities rules, covering tax exemption and donee status”. This statement sets out how the Board and IR will monitor and advise charitable entities of the requirements for tax exemptions, following the enactment of the Charities Act. A working protocol has been agreed between the Board and IR. ▸ Note: It is intended that OS 06/02 will be replaced by draft operational statement ED0207a and ED0207b (discussed above) when signed. Definition of charitable purpose Generally, for the purpose of the Charities Act, s 5 defines the term “charitable purpose” as including:  ▪ every charitable purpose, whether it relates to the relief of poverty, the advancement of education or religion, or any other matter beneficial to the community ▪ the purpose of a trust, a society or an institution if the purpose would satisfy the public benefit requirement, apart from the fact that the beneficiaries of the trust, or the members of the society or institution, are related by blood ▪ a marae, if the physical structure of the marae is situated on land that is a Māori reservation referred to in the Māori Land Act 1993 (Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993), and the funds of the marae are used only for the administration and maintenance of the land and of the physical structure of the marae or any other charitable purpose, and ▪ the promotion of amateur sport if it is the means by which a charitable purpose referred to in the first bullet point above is pursued (this last category applies from 25 February 2012). Furthermore, if the purposes of a trust, a society or an institution include a non-charitable purpose (for example, advocacy) that is merely ancillary to a charitable purpose of the trust, society or institution, that non-charitable purpose does not prevent registration as a charitable entity. A non-charitable purpose is ancillary to a charitable purpose of a trust, society, or institution if the noncharitable purpose is: ▪ ancilliary, secondary, subordinate, or incidental to a charitable purpose of the trust, society or institution, and ▪ not an independent purpose of the trust, society or institution. Example: In the first appeal under the Charities Act, the High Court in Travis Trust v Charities Commission (2009) 24 NZTC 23,273 held that, on the basis of first principle and on consideration of the authorities, the promotion of a horse race is not a charitable purpose in and of itself. The High Court noted that the Charities Commission (now known as the “Board”) registered mixed trusts on the condition that any private objects  of a charitable entity would not be given any effect by the trustees or governance body of the entity. The single issue before the Court, in this case, was, therefore, whether the provision of prize money for an annual and significant race on the New Zealand horse-racing calendar was a charitable purpose. The Court analysed the definition as contained in the Charities Act. Charitable purpose and the common law The focus of the case was on the fourth general benefit head. The Court proceeded on the basis that the purpose of the trust was either the support of the Travis Stakes or of the Cambridge Jockey Club’s annual programme of race meetings. Sports and leisure cases After reviewing the sports and leisure cases, the High Court found that the weight of authorities ran powerfully against a finding that a gift towards the prize in the Travis Stakes was charitable. The High Court did note, however, that recent New Zealand cases tended to support the idea that the concept of charitable purpose was evolving in response to changing social and cultural circumstances. In the area of sport and leisure, the general principle appeared to be that sport, leisure and entertainment for their own sake were not charitable, but, where these purposes were expressed to be and were, in fact, the means by which other valid charitable purposes, such as health or education, would be achieved, they will be held to be charitable. As noted above, the promotion of amateur sports can qualify as a charitable purpose if it is the means by which a charitable purpose is pursued. This applies from 25 February 2012. Public benefit The High Court noted that, once it was established that the purpose of a trust was charitable in character, it must also be established that the benefits of the trust will accrue to the public. The Court considered that the widest valid category of beneficiaries of the trust in this case would be the members of the Cambridge Jockey Club. After drawing all the principles together, the High Court found that the purpose of the trust was to fund a race for the benefit of the Cambridge Jockey Club’s race programme. As it was a private club, the High Court held that the Cambridge Jockey Club was not the community, or a sufficient enough section of it, to amount to “the public”. Even if the Cambridge Jockey Club did, in fact, constitute the community or an appreciable section of it, the promotion of horse racing generally was not a charitable purpose in and of itself. The Court said that “a trust to promote racing could only be charitable in nature if its deeper purpose was the pursuit of some other objective, either in principle or, in accordance with charities jurisprudence, a charitable purpose in its own right within the spirit and intendment of the Statute of Elizabeth. Thus, if it could have been established that the true intention of the support for this race was the promotion of health, education or perhaps even animal welfare, it might have satisfied the test”. The High Court upheld the decision of the Commission and dismissed the appeal.  See also, Canterbury Development Corp v Charities Commission; Canterbury Development Corp Trust v Charities Commission; CEDF Trustee Ltd as Trustee of the Canterbury Economic Development  Fund v Charities Commission (2010) 24 NZTC 24,143, Liberty Trust v Charities Commission (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-054, Re Queenstown Lakes Community Housing Trust (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-059, Re Greenpeace of New Zealand Inc (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-088 (SC) and Re Family First New Zealand (2015) 27 NZTC ¶22-017. Effect of deregistration Legislative changes clarified the tax implications that arise when a charity is removed from the Charities Register and not eligible to derive exempt income under s CW 41 or CW 42. In particular, the rules clarify how existing legislation (including the FBT and donations tax credit regimes) applies to deregistered charities. Retention of tax-exempt status until day of final decision Amendments to s CW 41 ensure that charities that are removed from the charities register continue to be tax-exempt until the “day of final decision”, providing they have acted in accordance with their rules contained in the charities register. The “day of final decision” is the later of: ▪ the day the charity is removed from the charities register ▪ the day on which the charity exhausts all disputes and appeals regarding its charitable status. Thus, provided a deregistered charity has acted in accordance with its rules, there are no retrospective tax consequences. They become tax-paying from the day of final decision. However, where a charity does not comply with its rules, it loses its tax-exempt status from that earlier date. Retention of FBT exemption The effect of the above amendment is largely mirrored in the amendment for fringe benefit tax (FBT) purposes. The definition of “charitable organisation” is amended to provide that a deregistered charity can still be a charitable organisation and eligible for the FBT exemption for a specified period (provided it otherwise satisfies the  definition). The period in question starts from the date the charity is registered on the charities register and ends with the earlier of: ▪ the last day of the relevant quarter or income year in which the charity does not comply with their rules, or ▪ the last day of the relevant quarter or income year in which the day of final decision falls. Thus, only those charities that have not complied with their rules are subject to the earlier loss of their FBT exemption. Opening values for assets and consideration for financial arrangements Section HR 11 dictates what the initial opening values for assets and consideration for financial arrangements are when a charity becomes a tax-paying entity. The section applies on and after the day the charity is deregistered and no longer able to derive exempt income under ss CW 41 and CW 42, defined as the “date of cessation”. The cost of premises, plant, equipment and trading stock of a deregistered charity will be the value that would be used at the date of cessation if s CW 41 or CW 42 had never applied. A similar approach applies to determining the consideration for any financial arrangement, which will be determined by applying the following formula: consideration paid to person + expenditure − consideration paid by person − income where: consideration paid to person is the consideration that is paid to the charity before the date of cessation expenditure is the expenditure that would have been incurred under the financial arrangements rules before the date of cessation consideration paid by person is the consideration that is paid by the charity before the date of cessation  income is the income that would have been derived under the financial arrangements rules before the date of cessation. The charity will also be treated as having the unexpired portion of expenditure under s EA 3 (Prepayments) and the unpaid amount under s EA 4 (Deferred payment of employment income) that it would have had if s CW 41 or CW 42 never applied. A deduction will be available for the unexpired portion under ss DB 50 and DB 51 in the income year that contains the date of cessation. Some charities may not have sufficient records on the actual historical cost of their assets and financial arrangements because they were not required to keep them or they are a small charity with low administrative capacity. In these circumstances, s HR 11(6) provides that charities may use information from their annual returns contained on the register of charities. These rules apply from 14 April 2014. Tax on accumulated assets of deregistered charity In addition, ss CV 17 and HR 12 introduce a tax on the accumulated assets of a deregistered charity. Under s HR 12, a deregistered charity will have an amount of income equal to the value of the net assets (being assets less liabilities) held on the day of final decision. The income will be derived on the day 12 months after the day of final decision. However, excluded from the amount of income will be: ▪ assets distributed or applied in that 12 months for charitable purposes ▪ assets distributed or applied in that 12 months in accordance with the charity’s rules ▪ assets received from the Crown to settle a Treaty of Waitangi claim and/or in accordance with the Māori Fisheries Act 2004 ▪ assets, other than money, gifted or left to the charity when it met the requirements to derive exempt income under s CW 41 or CW 42  ▪ the value of land and improvements on the land for marae built on reservation land established under the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993, and ▪ from 1 April 2019, the value of a parent company’s shares in a subsidiary if a parent entity and one or more members of a charitable group deregister at the same time. The provision will not apply if the charity is re-registered on the charities register within 12 months of the day of final decision. In addition, with effect from 1 April 2019, if a charity sells an interest in a subsidiary at arm’s length for market value, s HR 12 does not apply to that subsidiary if it is deregistered as a result of the sale. A de minimis threshold of $10,000 in net assets has also been introduced to exclude small-scale charities from the deregistration tax rules with effect from 1 April 2019. Section CV 17 provides that an amount of income under s HR 12 is income of the deregistered charity for the income year that contains the day 12 months after the day of final decision. Section CV 17 applies from 14 April 2014. Section HR 12 applies from 1 April 2015 with two exceptions. The first exception is where the charity voluntarily deregisters before 1 April 2015, in which case the provision applies from 14 April 2014. The second exception relates to community housing providers that have not voluntarily deregistered before 1 April 2015. In that case the provision applies from 1 April 2017. Law: CHA ss 2, 3, 5, 6, 8–10, 13–20, 41; IT07 ss CW 41(5), HR 11, HR 12  ¶24-200 Charitable business exemption Income derived by a business carried on for charitable purposes, or for business income derived by or on behalf of or for the benefit of any trust, society or institution, is exempt if:  ▪ the income is derived by a trustee in trust for charitable purposes, or derived by a society or institution established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes and not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual ▪ the trust, society or institution carries out its charitable purposes in New Zealand ▪ the trustee, society or institution is a tax charity, and ▪ no person with some control over the business is able to direct or divert income to the benefit or advantage of: □ if the charity is carrying on the business for another entity (the controlling entity), a person other than the charity or the controlling entity except for a purpose of the charity or controlling entity, or □ in any other case, a person other than the charity except for a purpose of the charity. With effect from 1 April 2020 for the 2020–21 and later income years, the entity carrying on the business must also be registered as a charitable entity under the Charities Act 2005 at the time the income is derived. To attract the exemption, the business must be carried on for charitable purposes. “Charitable purpose” is defined to include “the relief of poverty, the advancement of education or religion, or any other matter beneficial to the community”. The exemption is not available if a person associated with the charity is able to receive some financial benefit from it. This exception precludes application of the exemption in situations in which a taxpayer carries on a business through the medium of a charitable trust or company in circumstances in which it is likely that he or she would have carried on that business in his or her own personal capacity. See ¶24-210. Example 1:  The business must be carried on for charitable purposes, rather than just the derivation of the income, which must be held for those purposes. For the exemption to apply, the income earned need not be applied immediately for the charitable purposes; it may be held in reserve in the course of carrying on the business. See Calder Construction Co Ltd v C of IR [1963] NZLR 921.  Example 2: When a business is not carried on in trust for charitable purposes, a subsequent disposition of income to a charity does not make it “charitable”. See MK Hunt Foundation Ltd v C of IR [1961] NZLR 405.  Also see Trustees of the Auckland Medical Aid Trust v C of IR (1979) 4 NZTC 61,404, Cowey Mills & Co Ltd v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,172 and C of IR v NTN Bearing-Saeco (New Zealand) Ltd (1986) 8 NZTC 5,039 regarding charitable companies. Charitable trusts are attractive to businesses, the main benefit being the exemption from income tax. Any organisation intending to set up a non-profit body would most probably seek to establish a charity as its first option. For example, a large company seeking brand image may choose a charity in which the charity, through the use of the company logo or name, indirectly promotes the institution setting it up. A charity can be set up by a trust deed, an incorporated society or a charitable company that would be limited by shares or by guarantee. For tax purposes, any institution or society may qualify. See also ¶24-195. Charity overseas Business income, in terms of the exemption, is exempt only to the extent that it is derived for charitable purposes within New Zealand. The income of a business having charitable purposes both here and overseas is, accordingly, apportioned by the Commissioner. The exemption is granted only in respect of that part applicable to charitable purposes within New Zealand. See C of IR v Dick (2001) 20 NZTC 17,396. Under the Charities Act 2005 an entity is not prevented from being registered as a charitable entity just because it has charitable  purposes outside New Zealand. For discussion of the registration requirements under the Charities Act, see ¶24-195. In cases where registration under the Charities Act is not available, a trustee of a trust, society or an organisation that is non-resident and carrying out its charitable purpose outside New Zealand, may still be capable of approval as a “tax charity” by the Commissioner. See s CW 41(5)(c). ▸Note: Draft Questions we’ve been asked In December 2020, the Commissioner released two draft Questions we’ve been asked concerning the charities business exemptions. The first, PUB00359a, “Charities business exemption – when it must be used”, considers the situations in which a charitable entity needs to use the business income exemption test in s CW 42 (which contains additional territorial and control restrictions) rather than the exemption test in s CW 41. The draft item concludes that a charitable entity must use the test in s CW 42 to determine if income derived from a business is exempt if: ▪ the charitable entity is carrying on the business, or ▪ another charitable entity (the operating entity) is carrying on the business for, or for the benefit of, the charitable entity (the controlling entity). A business will be carried on by an operating entity for, or for the benefit of, a controlling entity if all the rights to the income and capital of the business held by the operating entity are held for the benefit of the controlling entity. The second draft item, PUB00359b, “Charities business exemption – business carried on in partnership”, considers whether income derived by a charitable entity from a business will be exempt under s CW 42 if the business is carried on by a charitable entity in partnership with a non-charitable entity. The draft item concludes that income can be exempt in these circumstances. However, for the income to be exempt, the other requirements, such as the control and territorial restrictions, must also be satisfied.  Law: IT07 ss CW 41, CW 42, CW 42B, YA 1  ¶24-210 Control over charity’s business There is a considerable practical limitation on the exemption for business charities. The exemption is not available if a person with some control over the charity’s business is able to direct or divert an amount to the benefit or advantage of: ▪ if the charity is carrying on the business for another entity (the controlling entity), a person other than the charity or the controlling entity except for a purpose of the charity or controlling entity, or ▪ in any other case, a person other than the charity except for a purpose of the charity. If the charity fails to satisfy the limitation, the whole of the charity’s business income is returned as assessable income. No regard is had to the quantum of the benefit, so that the exemption is lost no matter how large or small the benefit. Person treated as having some control A person is treated as having some control over the business if: ▪ they can determine or materially influence the determination of the nature or the amount of the benefit or advantage or the circumstances in which it is received, gained, achieved or derived, and ▪ their ability to determine or influence the benefit arises because they are: □ the settlor or trustee of the trust that carries on the business □ a shareholder or director of the company carrying on the business  □ a settlor or trustee of a trust that is a shareholder of the company carrying on the business □ a person associated with any settlor, trustee, shareholder or director as mentioned above. Note that, previously, s CW 42 excluded businesses carried on by a company for charitable purposes and owned by a charitable trust from the income tax exemption. This was because the former test referred to a person with some control over the charity’s business being able to direct or divert an amount to their own benefit or advantage, and the charitable trust was deemed to have control over the business and to be able to direct or divert amounts from the business for its own benefit or advantage. Practically, this meant that a charity was not able to derive tax-exempt charitable business income in a subsidiary company, but that same income would be taxexempt if derived directly by the shareholder charitable trust. This was an unintended consequence and the section was amended retrospectively from 1 July 2008. A similar amendment was made for wholly-owned subsidiaries of tertiary education institutions (see ¶24275) and community housing entities (see ¶24-132). Definition of “settlor” and “business” for these purposes For the purposes of this test, the settlor of a trust is not confined to the person who simply settles property on a trust. A settlor is deemed to include a person who disposes of an asset to the trust in circumstances in which there is a reservation of an interest in the asset or the asset will revert back. See s CW 42(6). The concept of a business is also given an extended meaning. This extended meaning applies in the situation in which the trustee derives rental income from an asset that will revert back, or there is a reservation of an interest in the asset to the person who disposed of it to the trust. In such a situation, the holding of the asset for the derivation of rental income is deemed to constitute the carrying on of a business by the trustee. In the absence of any such specific provision, it would have been arguable that the mere holding of rental property does not amount to the carrying on of a business. When there is a person  whose association comes within any of the above categories, the business will fail to attract the exemption for business income of a charity. There must, however, be a nexus between the person concerned and the benefit received. This nexus is to the effect that by reason of the relationship to the trust or business, the person is able to materially influence the nature or amount of the benefit or income or the circumstances in which it is to be received. Example: If the settlor or a trustee is able to receive a benefit from the trust or can materially influence the nature or amount of any such benefits, there will be no exemption under s 61(27) of the Income Tax Act 1976 [now s CW 42]. Whether or not these parties actually benefit is not relevant. See C of IR v Dick (2001) 20 NZTC 17,396.  Persons treated as having no control A person who provides professional services to a charity is not treated as having some control over the charity’s business if the ability to determine or influence the benefit arises only because they provide professional services as part of carrying on a professional public practice. This also applies to a statutory trustee company, the Public Trust and the Māori Trustee providing professional services. Benefit or advantage A benefit or advantage may include an amount regardless of whether it is convertible into money. It also includes retaining or reserving an interest in an asset that has been disposed of to a charitable trust. No benefit or advantage arises when the benefit is in the form of interest on a loan made at current commercial rates, bearing in mind the nature and term of the loan. For this purpose, the Commissioner uses the current commercial rates published by the Reserve Bank as a yardstick. Law: IT07 s CW 42  ¶24-240 Non-business income of charities exemption  Income derived by the following persons is exempt under s CW 41(1): ▪ the trustees of a trust for charitable purposes, and ▪ a society or institution established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes and not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual. In addition, the trust, society or institution must be a tax charity (see ¶24-195). Where a charity is deregistered, a provision ensures that income derived by the charity during the period of its registration is still exempt income (see ¶24-195). Charitable purposes Charitable purposes are defined to include four categories — for the relief of poverty, for the advancement of education, for the advancement of religion and for other purposes beneficial to the community not falling within any of the above categories. See s YA 1 and ¶24-250. However, this list is not exhaustive, and it may well be that another purpose will be acceptable as falling into the general law concept of what constitutes a charity. When a trust has more than one purpose, one of which is non-charitable, charitable status is denied if the non-charitable purpose is not subordinate to the charitable one. However, it is not necessary to show that an organisation is run exclusively for charitable purposes. (See Example below.) A charitable trust enters the tax base when it loses its charitable status. Example: Trusts are treated differently and less restrictively than societies and institutions when it comes to the exemption of their income from tax. Although a trust may not itself be exclusively charitable in its establishment, it may still have a separate charitable function. If a segregated part of its income has been received and must be applied exclusively for charitable purposes, then s CW 41 (s CB 4(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act 1994) will apply. See Latimer v C of IR (2002) 20 NZTC 17,737 (CA).  The Court of Appeal decision in Latimer v C of IR had given rise to an issue of interpretation of s CB 4(1)(c) of the 1994 Act. The wording in issue was: Any amount derived by trustees in trust for charitable purposes or derived by any society or institution established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes … There was some debate as to whether the words “established and maintained exclusively for charitable purposes” applied to both “societies or institutions” and trusts, or just to “societies or institutions”. The Court of Appeal decision in Latimer held that it was the latter. Therefore, trusts do not need to be established and maintained for charitable purposes for the tax exemption to apply. It is sufficient that the income is derived by trustees in trust for charitable purposes. This point was upheld on appeal to the Privy Council: Latimer (Trustees for the Crown Forestry Rental Trust) v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,478. This conclusion is retained in the equivalent provision in the 2007 Act, s CW 41(1), because the income exemption for trusts is in a separate paragraph from the income exemption for societies or institutions. The trust rules For the purposes of the trust rules, a trust is a charitable trust in any tax year if the income derived or accumulated in that and all previous years by the trustee is held in trust solely for charitable purposes and any income derived in that year is exempt income. Law: IT07 ss CW 41, HC 13, YA 1  ¶24-250 Public benefit rule Even when the purposes of a trust or organisation fall within any of the heads of charity (ie the advancement of education or religion, or any other matter beneficial to the community), the trust or organisation is not charitable unless it exists for the benefit of the community or an appreciably important section of the community. It cannot exist for the benefit of particular individuals. This is the rule as to public benefit, and it applies in New Zealand.  Example: The Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child was refused recognition as a charitable organisation. An organisation with political purposes is not regarded as charitable because the public benefit rule is not complied with. Political purposes arise not only when the organisation is lobbying for a change in the law, but also when it advocates the maintenance of the existing law. The Court also stated that it was now beyond dispute that the element of public benefit is a necessary prerequisite for valid charitable purposes; at least under the second, third and fourth heads of charity. See Molloy v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,070 (CA). Compare this with Trustees of the Auckland Medical Aid Trust v C of IR (1979) 4 NZTC 61,404 (SC). Also consider the Supreme Court decision in Re Greenpeace of New Zealand Incorporated (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-088 where the court held that a blanket political purposes exclusion should no longer apply in New Zealand. The Supreme Court in that case concluded that the public benefit rule existed in addition to the requirement for a charitable purpose and rejected the suggestion that benefit to the public presumptively establishes the purpose as charitable.  See also Liberty Trust v Charities Commission (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20054, Educational Fees Protection Society Incorporation v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,203, Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Beneficiary Fund v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,185, Hester v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,421 (HC); (2005) 22 NZTC 19,007 (CA), C of IR v Medical Council of New Zealand (1995) 17 NZTC 12,409 (HC); (1997) 18 NZTC 13,088 (CA) and Re Education New Zealand Trust (2010) 24 NZTC 24,354. Fidelity funds maintained to meet claims by clients of lawyers and accountants in cases of theft are not trusts for a charitable purpose. The funds do not have the necessary public character to be charitable, as the potential claimants are restricted to those clients who have entrusted money to a professional person. See New Zealand Society of Accountants v C of IR; New Zealand Law Society v C of IR (1986) 8 NZTC 5,205 (CA). Blood relationship The meaning of “charitable purpose” includes an entity that can satisfy the public benefit requirement apart from the fact that its members are related by blood. This extended definition is also adopted in the Charities Act 2005. See ¶24-195.  Also, see Latimer v C of IR (2002) 20 NZTC 17,737 (CA) at 17,745– 17,749. Marae A marae has a charitable purpose if both of the following conditions are satisfied: ▪ the physical structure of the marae is situated on land that is a Māori reservation referred to in Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993 (Māori Land Act 1993), and ▪ the funds of the marae are used only for the administration and maintenance of the land and of the physical structure of the marae or some other charitable purpose. If a marae satisfies the above criteria, the entity administering it may qualify for an income tax exemption if it registers under the Charities Act. Donations made to the marae would also qualify for the charitable donations tax credit (for individuals, see ¶11-055) or deductions (for companies, see ¶10-492). A marae that is not situated on Māori reservation land may still qualify for an exemption from income tax under the general charitable purposes definition. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 58–60 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 8, September/October 2008 at 31. Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶24-270 Records of charity A charitable organisation that is fully exempt from income tax is not required to file an income tax return. However, accurate records must be kept. A charitable organisation must keep in New Zealand sufficient records to enable the Commissioner to ascertain the source of donations made to the organisation and the application of its funds, whether in New Zealand or overseas. Records may be kept in English, or any other language with the approval of the  Commissioner. In addition, the Commissioner may request the organisation provide a return of funds derived and/or received during the tax year, the return showing the source and application of those funds. The Commissioner may advise the Minister of Finance when she believes that funds are not being applied in accordance with the charitable objects of the particular organisation. A charitable organisation that is a member of a Māori authority may file a tax return to claim a refund of Māori authority credits attached to a distribution received from the Māori authority. See s 33(1B) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and ¶24-317. For a summary of the registration, reporting and monitoring of charities contained in the Charities Act 2005, see ¶24-195. Law: TAA ss 18K, 32, 33(1B), 58  ¶24-275 Tertiary education institutions — exempt income Income derived by tertiary education institutions is exempt under s CW 55BA if the institution is not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of an individual. The institutions concerned are those arising under subpart 3 or 4 of Pt 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, Pt 14 or 15A or subpart 1 of Pt 10 of the Education Act 1989) (universities, polytechnics, specialist colleges and wananga). These institutions do not need to register with the Charities Registration Board to retain tax-exempt status. The exempt status also extends to tertiary education subsidiaries. A tertiary education subsidiary is a company, wholly owned by one or more tertiary education institutions, where no person (other than a tertiary education institution) with some control over the company is able to direct or divert an amount derived from the company to their own benefit or advantage. For a discussion of when a person is treated as having some control and when a person is treated as having no control, see ¶24-210. Law: IT07 s CW 55BA  MĀORI LAND ACT 1993 (TE TURE WHENUA MĀORI ACT 1993) ¶24-280 Tax implications of Māori Land Act The Māori Land Act 1993 (Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993) came into force on 1 July 1993. The Act’s main purpose is to assist in retaining Māori land (comprising Māori customary land and Māori freehold land) in Māori ownership. Inland Revenue sets out the tax implications of the Act in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 7, December 1993 at 4.  ¶24-283 Trusts established under Māori Land Act Five types of land-holding trusts are established under the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993. These trusts are generally designed to limit the further fragmentation of Māori land titles by limiting rights of succession in certain cases. Charitable status Under s 245 of the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act, the trustees of any trust established under the Act may apply to the court for an order that they hold any part of the trust’s income on trust for such charitable purposes as are specified in the court order. However, s 245 does not deem any income derived by an approved trust to be held for charitable purposes for the purposes of the revenue Acts, regardless of whether the trust’s purposes are, in fact, charitable at general law. A trust must meet the following requirements to gain charitable status for Inland Revenue’s purposes: ▪ it must have a charitable purpose ▪ it must not be carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual ▪ if it is wound up, it must have provision in its rules for its assets to be given to another charity with terms at least as strict as the  donor charity ▪ it must have no power to amend its rules to detract from the above charitable requirements, and ▪ it must be registered with the Charities Registration Board. Charitable income of Māori Trust Boards exempted Public binding ruling BR Pub 08/02 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 8, September/October 2008 at 26) indicates that income derived by a Māori Trust Board from assets declared to be held on a charitable trust can be tax-exempt even when the twin legal requirements of public benefit and charitable purpose are not satisfied. The ruling applies only when all the purposes of the trust include purposes specified in s 24 or 24A of the Māori Trust Boards Act 1955, all other elements necessary for a charitable trust are present, and the declaration of trust (under s 24B of that Act) has been submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. No declaration of trust shall have any force or effect unless it has been approved by the Commissioner as required under s 24B(3) of the Māori Trust Boards Act. Section 13(2)(b) of the Charities Act 2005 will treat such trusts as complying with the s 13(1)(a) requirement of that Act, which requires that an entity qualifies for registration as a charitable trust if the trustees derive income in trust for charitable purposes. Provided the trust can satisfy other registration criteria, it will be registered with the Charities Registration Board. The Commissioner’s interpretation effectively recognises Parliament’s intention to give trusts established by Māori Trust Boards charitable status in particular circumstances. The ruling applies to income derived by a Māori Trust Board for an indefinite period beginning on the first day of the 2008–09 income year. Law: CHA s 13(2)(b); ML s 245  ¶24-285 Māori incorporations and trusts Māori trusts and Māori incorporations that are Māori authorities (generally, all Māori trusts and Māori incorporations established or operating under the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993) are taxed according to the terms of subpart HF of the Income Tax Act 2007. See ¶24-288–¶24-335. Charitable status Māori incorporations are established by order of the Māori Land Court. Under s 258 of the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act, a Māori incorporation may, by special resolution, declare that it shall possess any part of its property, or the income derived from part of its property, on trust for charitable purposes. However, the fact that a Māori incorporation has declared a charitable trust under s 258 does not deem the trust to have a charitable purpose for the purposes of the revenue Acts. Inland Revenue will apply its usual criteria when determining whether a trust established under s 258 should have a charitable status for tax purposes. Law: ML s 258  ¶24-287 Liability of Māori Trustee acting as a receiver The court may appoint a Māori Trustee as a receiver under s 83 of the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993 to collect rents from Māori land. As a receiver, he or she is an officer of the court and is neither a trustee nor an agent. Income received is taxable as income of the persons who would have received it if a receiver had not been appointed. The Māori Trustee has no liability for tax on the income collected as receiver. A receiver under a debenture is in a different category, as he or she is trustee/agent for either the company concerned or the debenture holder. Law: ML s 83  MĀORI AUTHORITIES  ¶24-288 Overview of Māori authorities A specific regime applies for the taxation of Māori authorities and individuals who derive benefits from those organisations. All eligible persons who elect to be Māori authorities are taxed under the regime. The regime includes a credit attribution system similar to the company imputation regime. The main provisions of the regime are contained in subparts HF and OK of the Income Tax Act 2007. The key features of the regime are: ▪ a Māori authority is taxed on its income at the rate of 17.5% ▪ tax paid by the Māori authority gives rise to Māori authority credits that are credited to a “Māori authority credit account” ▪ Māori authority credits may be attached to distributions of taxpaid income made to members to reflect the tax paid by the Māori authority ▪ the amount of the distribution and the value of the Māori authority credits are included in a member’s income ▪ Māori authority credits may be attached to contributions made to approved retirement savings schemes for members, to satisfy the contributor’s retirement scheme contribution tax liability (see ¶29-300 et seq) ▪ a member can use Māori authority tax credits to offset his or her tax liabilities, and ▪ Māori authority credits that cannot be offset against a member’s tax liabilities are refundable to the member. Tax provisions outside of the Māori authority rules apply to Māori authorities, subject to the Māori authority rules. See Inland Revenue booklet, “Becoming a Māori authority”, IR 487 (December 2017).  Law: IT07 subparts HF, OK  ¶24-295 Eligibility to be Māori authority Only persons listed in s HF 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007 may elect to become a Māori authority. Eligibility is limited to entities that manage Māori assets in community ownership and are subject to significant constraints and restrictions on their activities; for example, restrictions imposed under the Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1993 on the ability to alienate or trade land interests. The list of eligible persons includes: ▪ a company or a trust that is established by an order made under Te Ture Whenua Māori Act ▪ a company or a trust that owns land that is subject to Te Ture Whenua Māori Act ▪ the Māori Trustee in its capacity as an agent for an owner of land that is subject to Te Ture Whenua Māori Act ▪ a Māori Trust Board as defined in s 2 of the Māori Trust Boards Act 1955 ▪ the Crown Forestry Rental Trust ▪ Te Ohu Kai Moana Trustee Ltd ▪ Aotearoa Fisheries Ltd ▪ a company that is: □ established by a mandated iwi organisation to be an assetholding company, as contemplated by s 12(1)(d) of the Māori Fisheries Act □ recognised by Te Ohu Kai Moana Trustee Ltd as a mandated iwi organisation under s 13(1) of the Māori Fisheries Act  ▪ the trustees of a trust that is recognised by Te Ohu Kai Moana Trustee Ltd as a mandated iwi organisation under s 13(1) of the Māori Fisheries Act ▪ the trustees of trusts that are established by Te Ohu Kai Moana Trustee Ltd as a mandated iwi organisation in accordance with ss 79 and 92 of the Māori Fisheries Act, and ▪ a company or a trust that receives and manages assets on behalf of Māori claimants transferred by the Crown as part of a settlement of a claim under the Treaty of Waitangi. Entities not listed in s HF 2 may apply to the Government to be added to the list. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 35. Law: IT07 s HF 2  ¶24-301 Election to be Māori authority An eligible person must make an election to be a Māori authority by giving notice to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue on form IR 483. The Commissioner must give the person notice that the election is accepted. The election takes effect on the first day of the income year in which notice of the election is given to the Commissioner, unless the notice of election nominates the first day of the succeeding income year, in which case the election will take effect from that later date. An election ceases to have effect if an entity ceases to be a Māori authority or if a Māori authority gives notice to the Commissioner cancelling the election. An eligible person who chooses not to make an election is taxed under the general tax rules. A deregistered charity that is eligible to be a Māori authority may make a retrospective election to become a Māori authority from the date on which the charity fails to comply with its rules. This ensures that such a deregistered charity is not taxed at a higher rate for its retrospective tax obligations than for its prospective obligations.  Law: IT07 s HF 11  ¶24-307 Tax rate for Māori authorities The income of a Māori authority is taxed at the rate of 17.5%. This rate is considered to reflect the marginal tax rate of the majority of members receiving benefits from Māori authorities. A “member” of a Māori authority means a shareholder of a Māori authority if it is a company and a beneficiary if the Māori authority is a trust. As with other taxpayers (with the exception of companies), Māori authorities can make certain deduction rate elections for the deduction of resident withholding tax on resident passive income. See ¶15-020. Law: IT07 s YA 1, sch 1 pt A cl 7  ¶24-311 Distributions by Māori authorities Both cash and non-cash benefits provided to members are treated as distributions for the purpose of the Māori authority rules, including amounts paid, credited or applied to members, advances that are not bona fide investments but are virtually a distribution of income and taxable bonus issues made by Māori authorities that are companies. Transfers of property between Māori authorities and their members may also be treated as distributions to the extent that the consideration (if any) paid for the property does not reflect the market value of the property. Where amounts would otherwise be dividends to members, the Māori authority tax rules prevail and the amounts are treated as distributions made by the Māori authority to the member, except for the purpose of s CW 10 (exemption for dividends between wholly-owned companies). Māori authorities may make taxable distributions and non-taxable distributions. A “taxable Māori authority distribution” is a distribution made from income of the Māori authority derived in the 2004–05 or subsequent income year that is not exempt from tax in the hands of the Māori authority. A taxable bonus issue made by a Māori authority to a member is also a taxable Māori authority distribution. Taxable  Māori authority distributions are included in the income of members. All other distributions (eg distributions of exempt income or income earned under the rules applying to Māori authorities before the 2004–05 income year) are not taxable to members. Law: IT07 ss CD 37, CV 11(1), CW 55, HF 4–HF 7  ¶24-314 Credit attribution system for Māori authorities Most Māori authorities are required to establish and maintain a Māori authority credit account (MACA). Tax paid by a Māori authority that is required to maintain a MACA gives rise to Māori authority credits that are recorded in its MACA. Māori authority credits may be attached to “taxable Māori authority distributions” made to members. The MACA is debited by the amount of credits attached to a distribution. See ¶24-327. Resident withholding tax (RWT) at the rate of 17.5% must be deducted from a taxable Māori authority distribution that is not fully credited. The rate of RWT increases to 39% (before 1 April 2021, 33%) if the distribution is more than $200 and the Māori authority does not have on record the IRD number of the member to whom the distribution is made. For a taxable Māori authority distribution, RWT paid is treated as a Māori authority credit attached to the distribution. See ¶15-020 and ¶15-065. Members’ income The amount of the distribution and the credits are included in the members’ income. The Māori authority credits (which include any RWT paid in respect of the distribution) are available to offset income tax payable by members. Excess credits are refundable to members. See s LA 6. Charities and other exempt entities that receive taxable distributions from Māori authorities are required to file a return to claim a refund of Māori authority credits. Māori authority credits attached to distributions received by a company give rise to credits in the company’s imputation credit account.  A person receiving a taxable Māori authority distribution has a tax credit for the amount of the Māori authority credit attached to the distribution. There are qualifications regarding the amount of credits that may be recognised. For example, credits attached in excess of the maximum permitted are not recognised to the extent of the excess, and credits attached to distributions paid under tax advantage arrangements are disregarded entirely. A credit of tax or a refund may be disallowed if the Commissioner considers that the amount claimed is excessive. Taxable Māori authority distributions are treated in the same manner as dividends for the purposes of tax-return filing requirements. Non-taxable distributions cannot have Māori authority credits attached and are not subject to RWT. The ability to pass out exempt income and other amounts tax-free means that Māori authorities must track their income sources. Retirement scheme contributions Where a Māori authority makes a contribution to an approved retirement savings scheme for a member, retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) will apply. The tax is deducted by the Māori authority before the contribution is paid to the retirement savings scheme. The Māori authority must pay any RSCT deducted to Inland Revenue. To meet the RSCT liability the Māori authority can attach Māori authority tax credits to the contribution. Any excess credits attached to a contribution are passed through to the member. See ¶29-315. Law: IT07 ss CV 11(2), HF 4(5), HF 7, LA 6, LO 1–LO 5, OA 18, OB 20, OK 10, OK 19, RE 24; TAA s 33(1B)  ¶24-317 Anti-streaming rules for Māori authorities To prevent Māori authorities streaming non-taxable distributions (ie distributions other than taxable Māori authority distributions) to members best able to use them, s HF 8 provides that where a distribution consists of a taxable Māori authority distribution and nontaxable amounts, an equal portion of the taxable and non-taxable  portions must be allocated among all members to whom the distribution is made. Section OK 20 requires every taxable Māori authority distribution made by a Māori authority in a tax year to be attributed with Māori authority credits at the same level. The first distribution made by a Māori authority in a tax year is referred to as the “benchmark distribution”. The maximum ratio at which credits can be allocated to distributions is 17.5:82.5. A benchmark distribution with a Māori authority credit ratio exceeding the maximum is treated as having a base ratio equal to 17.5:82.5. The Māori authority credit ratio is the amount of Māori authority credits attached to a distribution divided by the amount of the distribution. All subsequent distributions paid during the year must carry credits at the same ratio as the benchmark distribution. Credits may be attached at a different ratio if a ratio change declaration is made and the Māori authority declares that the subsequent distribution is not being made as part of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage. In the absence of a ratio change declaration, a distribution with a Māori authority credit ratio that differs from that of the benchmark distribution will give rise to a debit in the Māori authority credit account (MACA). See ¶24-327. Section GB 42 provides an anti-avoidance rule to deal with the streaming of Māori authority credits forming part of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage. Here, the term “tax advantage” includes the arising of a credit to a MACA. This rule is similar to the antiavoidance rule that applies to imputation credit streaming. See ¶17120. The rules governing the allocation of imputation credits to beneficiaries of trusts are extended to Māori authority credits to prevent trustees of trusts that are Māori authorities from allocating Māori authority credits to beneficiaries best able to use them. Generally, these rules require that the proportion of credits allocated to a beneficiary reflects the proportion of total distributions received by the beneficiary. See ¶25-105. Law: IT07 ss GB 42, GB 43, HF 8, LO 2, OK 16, OK 19, OK 20  ¶24-321 Loss offset, grouping and amalgamation for Māori authorities Corporate Māori authorities are included in the scope of the definition of a “company”. This means that, subject to the Māori authority rules, corporate Māori authorities can apply the tax rules relating to companies. However, there are limits on the extent to which corporate Māori authorities can apply the company tax provisions. A Māori authority may offset net income or tax losses only against the tax losses or net income, as the case may be, of another Māori authority. Corporate Māori authorities may amalgamate or form a consolidated group only with other companies that are Māori authorities. Intercompany distributions between wholly-owned Māori authorities qualify for the inter-corporate dividend exemption in s CW 10. A company that becomes a Māori authority ceases to be an imputation credit account company. Law: IT07 ss CD 37, HF 3, OB 1(2)(b)  ¶24-324 Co-operative companies as Māori authorities A Māori authority that is a co-operative company may make a notional distribution to a member under s OB 79 as if a Māori authority credit were an imputation credit. Notional distributions made by Māori authorities that are co-operative companies are expressly included in the income of the members to whom the distributions are made. Māori authority co-operative companies may attach Māori authority credits to notional distributions in the same way that non-Māori authority co-operative companies may attach imputation credits to such distributions. Cash distributions made in respect of notional distributions that have already been taxed to members (ie for which an election has been made) are not taxable Māori authority distributions and are not included in the income of members. A Māori authority may not be a co-operative company if a shareholder is not a Māori authority. Law: IT07 ss CV 11(1), HF 3(2)(c), HF 4(3), HF 5–HF 7, OK 19(5)  ¶24-327 Māori authority credit account Most Māori authorities are required to establish and maintain a Māori authority credit account (MACA). Two kinds of Māori authority must not operate a MACA: Māori authorities whose constitution prohibits the making of distributions to members, and Māori authorities that derive only exempt income (other than exempt dividend income under s CW 10). A MACA operates in a similar way to an imputation account operated by a company and is subject to similar rules. Credits to record The following amounts arise as credits to the MACA: ▪ a payment of income tax or provisional tax, with the exception of: □ income tax paid in respect of the 2003–04 or earlier tax year □ where a Māori authority becomes a Māori authority during the imputation year, income tax relating to that part of the income year before the Māori authority became a Māori authority □ income tax paid by way of imputation credits or further income tax, or □ income tax paid by crediting a R&D tax credit against income tax liability ▪ provisional tax paid to another Māori authority under s RC 32 (payments transferred within a wholly-owned group of companies) ▪ further income tax paid where the MACA is in debt at the end of the tax year or when the entity ceases to be a Māori authority (see below) ▪ Māori authority credits attached to distributions made to the Māori authority during the tax year  ▪ imputation credits attached to dividends paid to the Māori authority during the tax year ▪ imputation credits attributed to a Māori authority, being an investor in a multi-rate PIE, under s HM 54 ▪ the amount of R&D tax credit the Māori authority is entitled to ▪ an amount to offset a debit for Māori authority credits determined to have been the subject of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage to the extent that it is subsequently established that the Māori authority credits were not the subject of any such arrangement ▪ the amount of any RWT deduction deemed to have been derived by the Māori authority in terms of s RA 9. The timing of when each of these credits arises is also prescribed in ss OK 2–OK 9. Debits to record Debits to the MACA during an imputation year arise from the following: ▪ Māori authority credits attached to distributions made by the Māori authority ▪ the amount of any provisional tax allocated by a Māori authority to another Māori authority that is an “underpaid company” in terms of s RC 32 (payments to be transferred within a whollyowned group of companies) ▪ refunds of income tax paid to a Māori authority except to the extent that the refund: □ relates to the 2003–04 or earlier tax year, or □ relates to a tax year or part of a tax year during which the Māori authority did not maintain a MACA (where the refund  relates to part of a tax year during which the Māori authority did not maintain a MACA, the debit is apportioned to the number of days in which the Māori authority maintained a MACA), or □ is not more than the amount of the debit for a breach of shareholding — see below ▪ making a distribution with a Māori authority credit ratio that differs from that of the benchmark distribution in contravention of s OK 20 ▪ transfers of refundable credits under s LA 6(2)(d) where the transfer does not lead to a refund and refunds of credits under s LA 6(2)(e) ▪ failure to meet the continuity of shareholding requirements — see below ▪ the allocation of credits in pursuance of a tax advantage arrangement in terms of s GB 43 ▪ an amount equivalent to the credit balance in the MACA when a Māori authority ceases to be a Māori authority, and ▪ any overpaid income tax applied by the Commissioner in satisfaction of tax liabilities (other than income tax or provisional tax instalments), except to the extent the amount applied is: □ for income tax paid for the 2003–04 or earlier tax year, or □ for income tax paid before the date that a debit for a breach of shareholder continuity has arisen and is for not more than the amount of the debit for the breach of continuity. The timing of when each of these debits arises is also prescribed in ss OK 10–OK 18.  The Commissioner has the power to correct credits or debits incorrectly recorded in a MACA. End-of-year requirements Māori authority credit accounts are subject to end-of-year requirements and general penalty provisions similar to those that apply in respect of imputation credit accounts. If a MACA has a debit balance at 31 March, further income tax is payable by the following 20 June. Further income tax must also be paid where a MACA has a debit balance immediately before a Māori authority ceases to be a Māori authority. Payments of further income tax may be applied to an income tax or a provisional tax liability that arises at any time when the Māori authority is required to establish and maintain a MACA. Income tax paid in relation to a tax year in which a Māori authority is required to establish and maintain a MACA may be applied to a further income tax liability caused by a MACA debit balance. A Māori authority that is liable to pay further income tax for an end-of-year debit balance is also liable to pay a special tax known as Māori authority distribution penalty tax of an amount equal to 10% of the amount of the further income tax. The general compliance and penalty rules apply if the Māori authority fails to pay the further income tax and penalty tax by the due date. Provision is made for the remission of Māori authority distribution penalty tax and interest and late payment penalties relating to further income tax in ss 181B and 183A of the Tax Administration Act 1994. See ¶14-090 and ¶14180. Continuity requirements Corporate Māori authorities are required to maintain 66% continuity of shareholding for the purpose of carrying forward Māori authority credits. If 66% continuity of shareholding is not met, Māori authority credits are cancelled. Non-corporate Māori authorities, such as Māori trust boards who do not issue shares, should qualify for the “special corporate entity relief”, whereby the special corporate entity is treated as always being 100% owned by the same single person so that no breach of continuity is possible. See ¶16-155. Limits on refund of tax  A refund of income tax to a Māori authority is limited to the credit balance in its MACA at the later of the end of the tax year most recently ended, the last day of any period for which the Māori authority has filed a Māori authority credit account return under s 70B(3) of the Tax Administration Act and the last day of a period for which the Commissioner has required such a return to be filed under s 70B(1). For Māori authorities that have an extension of time for filing returns, so long as the MACA return for a tax year is filed under the extension of time before the end of the next tax year, the refund is limited to the credit balance in the Māori authority’s MACA on the last day of the tax year for which the return is furnished, not the most recently ending tax year. These rules are similar to the rules that limit a refund or allocation of income tax to an imputation credit account company to the balance in its imputation credit account. See ¶17105. Income tax paid in excess that is not refunded to a Māori authority because its MACA has insufficient credits is retained and applied in payment of income tax or provisional tax payable by the Māori authority in the tax year in which the entitlement arose or an earlier or later tax year. The excess can be credited as at a date on which there is no liability to pay provisional tax but from which use of money interest applies in relation to underpaid residual income tax. To the extent that income tax not refunded cannot be so applied, it is retained by the Commissioner. Law: IT07 subpart OK, ss OA 2(5), OA 8, RM 22–RM 27; TAA ss 97B, 104B, 140CB, 181B, 181D, 183A  ¶24-331 Moving in and out of the Māori authority tax regime A person who has elected to become a Māori authority may cancel that election by giving notice to the Commissioner. If eligible, that person may elect to re-enter the Māori authority tax regime. However, to ensure that Māori authorities do not move in and out of the rules to obtain tax advantages, a Māori authority re-entering the Māori authority tax rules is treated as if it had disposed of its property  for market value immediately before re-entering the regime and then re-acquired it on the same date for the same value. For depreciation purposes, however, the cost of the property is limited to the lower of the market value of the property on the date of acquisition and the original cost of the property. Other transitional rules apply to ensure that no additional tax consequences arise for entities moving in and out of the regime. Companies entering the Māori authority tax rules lose their imputation credits (the rules relating to a company ceasing to be an imputation credit account company apply) and any retained earnings, accumulated profits and capital reserves may be distributed to members tax-free. A company exiting the Māori authority rules may transfer a credit balance in its Māori authority credit account to its imputation credit account. Income derived by the company in or before the 2003–04 tax year is converted to available subscribed capital, the subsequent distribution of which is exempt from tax. Income derived after the 2003–04 tax year is treated as being from a taxable source to which imputation credits may be attached. For a trust entering the rules, trustee income derived before the trust became a Māori authority may be distributed to members tax-free. For a trust exiting the rules, taxable income derived by the Māori authority is treated as trustee income, the subsequent distribution of which is exempt from tax. Law: IT07 ss HF 9, HF 10, OB 21  ¶24-335 Filing and notification requirements for Māori authorities Māori authorities must file returns of income, and are required to provide members with information about distributions they receive or retirement scheme contributions made for their benefit so that those members can comply with their tax obligations. Māori authorities are also required to provide Inland Revenue with a Māori authority credit account return, and, if appropriate, an annual reconciliation  statement for retirement scheme contribution tax. No credit of tax is allowed or refund paid to members unless the Commissioner has received a distribution statement relating to the credit. The recordkeeping requirements in s 22(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 are extended to include records relating to Māori authority credit accounts and retirement scheme contributions. Before 1 April 2020, Māori authorities had to provide Inland Revenue with a distribution statement containing details of all distributions made for the year. From 1 April 2020, this information is required to be provided under the new investment income information provisions. The required information is set out in s 25I and sch 6 and must be provided by the 20th of the month following the month in which the distribution was paid to the member. All investment income payers must file their information electronically, unless they receive an exemption from the Commissioner. See also ¶15-215. Note that payers have been able to choose to apply the new rules since 1 April 2019. Law: IT07 s LO 5; TAA ss 22(2)(k), (lb), 25I, 31, 48B, 57, 69B, 70B, 227E, sch 6  ¶24-340 Deduction for donations by Māori authorities Section DV 12 provides that a Māori authority may deduct: ▪ a donation made to a Māori association as defined in the Māori Community Development Act 1962, for the purposes of that Act, or ▪ a charitable or other public benefit gift made to a donee organisation (see ¶11-055). All qualifying donations and gifts of money are deductible, to the extent that the donations do not exceed the Māori authority’s net income for that tax year. However, a deduction is denied to the extent to which the amount is a donation or gift by a deregistered charity to another charity within  12 months of deregistration. Law: IT07 s DV 12  CROWN RESEARCH INSTITUTES ¶24-390 Crown Research Institutes Crown Research Institutes (CRIs) were established under the Crown Research Institutes Act 1992. Crown Research Institutes are subject to tax on any payment received for an activity listed in s 7 of the Research, Science and Technology Act 2010 or for the purpose of producing outputs relating to public good, science and technology. “Public good, science and technology” is defined to mean science or technology that: ▪ is likely to increase knowledge or understanding of the physical, biological or social environment, or ▪ is likely to develop, maintain or increase skills or scientific or technological expertise that is of particular importance to New Zealand, or ▪ may be of benefit to New Zealand, but is unlikely to be funded or adequately funded from non-governmental sources. Crown Research Institutes are prohibited from maintaining imputation credit accounts. They can utilise loss carry-forward and grouping provisions. They are excluded from the income exemption provided by s CW 49 for promoters of scientific or industrial research. See ¶24-135. They are also excluded from the public authority exemption by s CW 38(5)(c). See ¶5-605. Law: IT07 ss CV 6, CW 38(5)(c), CW 49(2), OB 1(2)(d)  TRUSTS What is a trust?  ¶25-010  Overview of trust regime  ¶25-025  Trustee Income  ¶25-035  Beneficiary Income  ¶25-065  Settlors  ¶25-175  Trust Classification  ¶25-225  Trust Administration  ¶25-405  Trading Trusts  ¶25-505  Death and Deceased Estates  ¶25-525  Variation, Resettlement and Winding Up of Trusts ¶25-605 Trustee Liability  ¶25-685  ¶25-010 What is a trust? A trust, in its simplest form, is property that is subject to obligations owed by the property’s owner (the trustee) to the beneficiary or beneficiaries for whom the property is held. Fundamental to a trust are the rights of the beneficiaries. As noted by Millet LJ in Armitage v Nurse [1998] Ch 241 at 253–254: … there is an irreducible core of obligations owed by the trustees to the beneficiaries and enforceable by them which is fundamental to the concept of the trust. If the beneficiaries have no rights enforceable against the trustees there are no trusts. As a trust itself has no legal personality, it is the trustee that acts personally for the benefit of the trust’s beneficiaries. This means that a trustee is liable for that trustee’s actions as if those actions were on  the trustee’s own account. This is the case regardless of whether the trustee can benefit personally from the trust. Bare trusts At one extreme, a trustee may have no duties other than the duty to transfer ownership of the trust property to the beneficiary when called upon to do so; the trustee does little more than hold legal title to the trust property. Such a trust is commonly known as a bare trust. At the other extreme, a trustee may have a wide range of powers and administrative duties to perform. The focus of the rules for the taxation of trusts is on trusts other than bare trusts. Bare trusts are largely ignored for tax purposes. Generally speaking, a bare trustee is treated as a nominee or agent (or akin to a nominee or agent) of the beneficiary. Settlor, trustee and beneficiary A settlor of a trust can also be a trustee and a beneficiary of the trust. However, a person cannot be the sole trustee and beneficiary, as the essence of a trust is that the trustee holds or deals with trust property for the benefit of beneficiaries to whom the trustee owes fiduciary obligations. In the past, there were statutory concerns regarding settlors of a trust also being beneficiaries. For example, the general effect of former provisions of the Estate and Gift Duties Act 1968 was to claw back into a settlor’s estate for estate duty purposes, the value of any property he or she transferred to a trust where the benefit of the property could be enjoyed directly or indirectly by him or her, eg as a beneficiary. With the abolition of estate duty, this type of “claw back” is not currently a concern, although the possibility that some form of estate duty may be reintroduced in the future is a consideration. Multiple settlements may be treated as one trust In law, each settlement on a trust is the creation of a separate trust. See Baldwin v C of IR [1965] NZLR 1 and Tucker v C of IR [1965] NZLR 1027. For example, where A transfers property X to a trustee to be held upon certain trusts and B later transfers property Y to the  same trustee to be held upon the same trusts, B is the settlor of a separate trust affecting property Y. In practice, two or more settlements on the same trustee on the same terms are often managed as one trust with one tax return filed. This practice is allowed for tax purposes; the legislation provides that a trustee may choose to treat multiple settlements made on the same terms as one trust. See s HC 3 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 5, May 2001 at 29. Application of the trust rules The trust rules tax trusts largely by reference to the tax residence of the settlor rather than the trustee, as is the case with most other countries. As a general rule, income derived by a non-resident trustee from outside New Zealand is deemed to be income of the trustee if any settlor of the trust is resident in New Zealand at any time during the income year. Conversely, a foreign-sourced amount derived by a New Zealand resident trustee is deemed not to be income of the trustee when, broadly stated, no settlor of the trust (who is not a transitional resident) is resident in New Zealand during the income year. Additionally, subject to certain exceptions, New Zealand resident settlors are liable for tax on trustee income derived during an income year if no trustee of the trust is resident in New Zealand at all times during that year. For more on the taxation of foreign-sourced amounts derived by trustees, see ss HC 25, HC 26, HC 29 and ¶25-035. The trust rules incorporate the following elements: ▪ a definition of both “beneficiary income” and “trustee income” ▪ a wide definition of “settlor” ▪ complying trusts, foreign trusts and non-complying trusts ▪ the concept of a “taxable distribution” in relation to a foreign or non-complying trust ▪ ordering rules in relation to distributions from a trust  ▪ rules relating to a first-time New Zealand resident settlor, and ▪ specified rates of tax. The trust regime applies to all trusts (other than bare trusts), both in New Zealand and offshore. The trust rules do not apply to: ▪ a unit trust (for tax purposes, unit trusts are deemed to be companies and are taxed accordingly, see ¶24-190) ▪ a group investment fund to the extent it is treated as a company under the Income Tax Act ▪ a Māori authority ▪ a distribution under s HZ 1 (distributions from trusts of pre-1989 tax reserves). For commentary on the tax treatment of charitable trusts, see ¶24240. Trust law review A review of the law of trusts that commenced in 2010 has culminated in the enactment of a new Trusts Act. The Trusts Act 2019 was enacted on 30 July 2019 and comes into force on 30 January 2021. The only exception to this is a number of amendments to the Financial Services Legislation Amendment Act 2019, which came into force on 31 July 2019. The new Act replaces the Trustee Act 1956 and the Perpetuities Act 1964 to make trust law more accessible, and to clarify and simplify core trust principles and essential obligations for trustees. The Act also preserves the flexibility of the common law to allow trust law to continue to evolve through the courts. The new Act does not amend or alter any provisions regarding the taxation of trusts or established trust law principles. The Act:  ▪ makes it easier for people to understand how to appropriately use trusts to manage their affairs ▪ provides clarification of the key features of a trust and clear mandatory and default trustee duties so people know what their obligations are if they are involved in managing a trust ▪ introduces clear requirements for trustees to manage and provide information to beneficiaries so that beneficiaries can enforce their rights ▪ provides more flexible trustee powers and updated rules to allow trustees to manage and invest trust property in the most appropriate way ▪ provides clear rules for when people make changes to a trust or wind them up, and ▪ provides more options for removing and appointing trustees without having to go to court while also preserving a person’s ability to ask the courts to intervene to resolve disputes. Law: IT07 subpart HC, ss HC 3, YB 21  ¶25-025 Overview of trust regime Distributions from trusts At the time any distribution is made, a trust is categorised (for tax purposes only) as either a complying trust, a foreign trust or a noncomplying trust. This classification determines the tax treatment of any distribution other than a distribution of beneficiary income, and the applicable tax rate. See ¶25-225. Beneficiaries of foreign trusts and non-complying trusts may also be taxed on distributions of accumulated income and, in some cases, capital gains. These kinds of distributions are known as “taxable distributions”. See ¶25-305.  Trustee income and beneficiary income Generally, income derived by a trustee in an income year is taxed either as: ▪ “trustee income” at the flat rate of 33%, or ▪ “beneficiary income” at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. This is regardless of the category of trust. The taxation of trustee income and beneficiary income is discussed at ¶25-035 and ¶25-065 respectively. Special rules that apply to trusts In addition to the specific regime that applies to trustee and beneficiary income and other distributions from trusts, there are other specific rules throughout the Income Tax Act 2007 that have specific application to trusts. Modifications to continuity of shareholding rules A company cannot carry forward imputation credits unless a continuity of shareholding test is met. However, these rules are modified in relation to trustees so a change of trustee will not result in a loss of continuity. See ss OA 8, YC 9 and ¶16-190. Rules that apply to qualifying companies are modified for trustee shareholders If a trustee is a shareholder in a qualifying company all dividends must ordinarily be paid out to natural person beneficiaries. Where a trustee is a shareholder in a qualifying company there are limitations as to who can benefit from the trust. See s HA 7 and ¶19-010. These limitations do not apply in the same way to look-through companies. Anti-streaming rule applies to imputation credits distributed to beneficiaries Imputation credits distributed to beneficiaries are distributed in proportion to total distributions to prevent streaming imputation credits to the beneficiaries who are most able to use the credits. See ¶25-105.  Rules of association Associated person provisions apply to associate persons, companies, trusts and partnerships. The effect of the rules of association is to alter the incidence of tax due to certain relationships. Under these rules: ▪ the trustee of a trust is associated with the settlor and any person with the power to appoint or remove trustees: s YB 11 Note that there is no association between the settlor and an appointor who is a professional trustee. For the exemption for professional trustees to apply the appointor must be a provider of professional services who has not and cannot benefit from the trust, and who is subject to a professional code of conduct, and related disciplinary process, of an “approved organisation” as defined by the Tax Administration Act 1994 (eg a member of Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand, the New Zealand Law Society or the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners). See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 40 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 128. ▪ two trusts are associated if they have a common settlor ▪ a settlor is associated with a beneficiary ▪ a trustee is associated with a beneficiary ▪ a person is associated with a relative’s trustee, and ▪ a trustee can be associated with a company. In addition, a tripartite test provides that any two persons associated with the same third person are also associated. See s YB 1(3)(k) and ¶16-245. Transfers of property from trusts Rules in subpart FC provide for the income tax treatment of transfers of property including transfers following a person’s death and  distributions from trusts. Among other things, the rules provide a disposal value for trustees that make distributions in kind and a cost price for beneficiaries (or trustees) receiving property in kind. See further at ¶25-545. Trustee capacity With effect from 29 March 2018, a general rule was introduced into Pt Y of the Income Tax Act 2007 to distinguish between a trustee’s personal or body corporate capacity and their separate trustee capacity. A number of exceptions to this general rule apply where it would be contrary to the policy intent of the provisions to exclude a corporate or natural person trustee. The measure addresses the uncertainty surrounding the application of the voting interest test for corporate trustees as a result of two High Court decisions, Concepts 124 Ltd v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-100 and Staithes Drive Development Ltd v C of IR (2015) 27 NZTC ¶22-028. These decisions changed how the voting interest test, which is used to measure the ownership of companies, including their association, was applied to corporate trustees. In both cases, the High Court held that the voting interests in the relevant companies were held by the legal owner of shares, and effectively ignored the capacity in which those shares were held. This meant that the voting rights attached to shares owned by a corporate trustee were attributed to that trustee’s natural person shareholders in their personal capacity. Section YA 5 provides the core rule to distinguish between a trustee’s personal, body corporate, or other capacity, and their separate trustee capacity. The provision clarifies that when a person is acting in the capacity of trustee of a trust, they are treated, for income tax purposes, as acting in that capacity and not in their personal, body corporate, or other capacities. The provision clarifies that: ▪ any reference to “company” in the Income Tax Act does not include a corporate trustee (subject to any identified exceptions), and  ▪ any reference to “natural person” in the Income Tax Act does not include a natural person trustee (subject to any identified exceptions). The provision also ensures that if a person is the trustee of more than one trust, the person is acting in a different capacity for each trust. In particular, a corporate trustee is not looked-through, including for the purpose of association. Interpretation statement released In June 2018, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 18/01, “Taxation of trusts — income tax” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 17). The statement provides taxpayers with an updated summary of the tax