 payment, and ▪ the net change in the amount of closing tax book values in NZD during the income year. This brings to account all accrued gains and losses on the financial arrangement, including gains and losses arising from currency translation. Foreign currency loans used to finance foreign residential rental property In July 2020, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 20/07, “Income tax – Application of the financial arrangements  rules to foreign currency loans used to finance foreign residential rental property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 110), as one of three items addressing a range of tax issues a New Zealand tax resident individual may face if they own foreign residential rental property (see ¶5-232). The statement provides more detailed guidance on when and how the financial arrangements rules apply to foreign currency loans that New Zealand tax resident individuals use to finance a foreign residential rental property. It considers the circumstances when such a loan may be an excepted financial arrangement under s EW 5(17) of the Income Tax Act 2007 (ie where the borrower is a transitional resident) or under s EW 5(25) (ie when the loan is a variable principal debt instrument). Assuming a loan is not an excepted financial arrangement, the item considers the test for determining whether a person is a cash basis person to determine whether a spreading method must be applied during the term of the loan. The application of Determination G9A and the base price adjustment are then considered. A number of examples are also included. Forward contracts for foreign exchange and commodities — Determination G14B Determination G14B applies to a forward contract for foreign exchange or commodities, being a contract to buy or sell specified amounts of foreign currency or commodities at some future date at a specified rate. The determination does not apply to: ▪ a futures contract ▪ a security arrangement ▪ a forward contract for foreign exchange and commodities where the forward rates of the currency cannot be determined, or ▪ a forward contract covered by Determination G19, Determination G20, Determination G21, Determination G21A, Determination G27 and Determination G29 (except as specifically provided by those determinations).  The explanation in the determination outlines the method to be applied to a forward contract as follows: ▪ any offsetting of payments between the parties is ignored, so that every amount that would be payable under the forward contract is taken into account ▪ one of the currencies under the forward contract must be chosen as a base currency ▪ the expected component is determined by taking into account all the base currency payments and payment dates in relation to the forward contract when the person becomes a party to the contract, with those payments comprising: □ the base currency value of the payment or receipt, if any, made in consideration of entering into the contract □ the base currency value of the non-base currency payment to be made under the contract valued at the forward rate □ the base currency value of the non-base currency payment to be made under the contract valued at the contract rate ▪ where the base currency is not NZD, the expected base currency payments must be converted into expected NZD payments on the basis of forward rates available at the time the person becomes a party to the contract, and ▪ the expected NZD net amount is spread over the term of the forward contract. Futures contracts No determination has been issued for futures contracts. Swaps — Determination G27 A swap involves the exchange of payment streams without necessarily involving an exchange of principal. For example, a swap could involve the exchange of USD receivables for NZD, at a  specified rate. The effect would be to remove the potential for foreign-exchange-related fluctuations. Determination G27 applies to swaps that do not involve commodities, equity, property, more than two currencies, or any amortisation or accretion of principal. The determination provides four tax accounting methods to spread income or expenditure arising from common swap transactions. The Commissioner accepts that a conventional swap agreement of interest flows does not, in the appropriate context involving a nonresident, attract non-resident withholding tax. The swap payments are not pursuant to money lent. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 4, September 1996 at 13.  ¶6-215 Mandatory convertible notes under FA rules — Determination G5C Determination G5C is a determination concerning mandatory conversion convertible notes. These are notes that are redeemable only in shares in the issuing company or some other company. The determination is restricted in its application to notes under which the coupon interest rate is neither less than 5% pa (or half the interest rate the issuer would have paid on cash repayment borrowings if lower) nor more than 15% pa (or double the interest rate the issuer would have paid on cash repayment borrowings if higher). The determination treats all amounts in respect of a note as relating to the underlying shares (and therefore outside the financial arrangements rules), with the exception of any coupon interest payments. Income and expenditure on the note are calculated by a pro rata daily apportionment of the coupon interest payment to income years. Any changes in the value of the note are assumed to be attributable to the equity component of the note. Several specific determinations on mandatory convertible notes have been released. See the full list of determinations issued by Inland Revenue at ¶6-600.  ¶6-218 Optional convertible notes under FA rules — Determination G22A Determination G22A deals with optional convertible notes (OCNs) where conversion into company shares is at the option of the holder and the convertible note is denominated in New Zealand dollars. Application of determination Determination G22A applies to an OCN that contains either an option that can be exercised only at maturity (a European-style warrant) or an option that allows the holder to exercise the warrant component during the OCN’s term (an American-style warrant). The determination recognises that a convertible note has a debt and equity component; the equity component is the option (or warrant) to receive repayment of the debt in the form of new shares. The determination prescribes methods of separating the consideration under the convertible note into debt and equity components. The value of the debt component is used to calculate financial arrangement income or expenditure during the term of the note and the base price adjustment at the end of the term. Generally, if the issuer and the subscriber are members of the same wholly-owned group of companies or if the exercise of the option would result in there being no change in the ownership of the company, no value will be attributed to the OCN’s equity component. Accordingly, all consideration paid by, to or on behalf of any person under the OCN is attributed to the debt component. However, this rule does not apply in circumstances where the subscriber subsequently sells the notes to third parties within 93 days of acquisition. If the value of the OCN’s equity component is not zero, the equity component’s value (for both company and holder) is the amount by which the consideration paid by the holder exceeds the debt component’s present value. The present value is calculated as required by another determination by reference to the debt component’s cashflows. Cashflows consist of the following payments payable over the term of the OCNs:  ▪ the cash redemption amount ▪ the coupon interest payments (if any), and ▪ any contingent fees. The income or expenditure for each of the years before the final year of the term must be calculated by reference to the debt component’s value. The calculation must be made using the yield to maturity method (or an alternative method producing results that are not materially different). The determination provides for the following consideration flows for calculating the base price adjustment: ▪ where the OCN contains a European-style warrant, the determination assumes that the debt component of the consideration paid or received by the issuer or holder on maturity is the face value of the note. If the holder elects to be repaid with new shares, any difference between the value of the shares and the OCN’s face value is treated as being attributable to the equity component, and ▪ where the OCN contains an American-style warrant, the determination assumes that the debt component of the consideration paid or received by the issuer or holder on the exercise date is the present value of the OCN debt component. The overall effect of the determination is that the financial arrangements rules treat an OCN as if it were a bond that: ▪ is issued at a price that excludes any amount paid or received for the OCN’s equity component (if any), and ▪ is settled for its face value (or its present value if converted before the end of its term). The Alesco case  In Alesco New Zealand Ltd v C of IR, the Court of Appeal held that Alesco New Zealand Ltd (Alesco NZ) failed to prove that its use of optional convertible notes (OCNs) was not a tax avoidance arrangement. In upholding the High Court’s decision and dismissing Alesco NZ’s appeal, the Court of Appeal said that Alesco NZ had used the financial arrangements rules and (the former) Determination G22 to claim tax deductions in a way that was outside Parliament’s contemplation. The facts In 2003, Alesco NZ bought two New Zealand companies. Alesco Corporation (Alesco Corp), an Australian Company, advanced $78m to Alesco NZ (its wholly-owned subsidiary) to fund the acquisitions. In consideration Alesco NZ issued a series of OCNs for a 10-year term. On maturity Alesco Corp had the option of either being repaid $78m or converting the notes into new shares in Alesco NZ. In accordance with Determination G22, Alesco claimed a tax deduction for amounts treated as interest liabilities on the notes between 2003 and 2008. The Australian Tax Office (ATO) viewed the OCN as a 100% equity instrument so the notional interest received from Alesco NZ was not assessable to Alesco Corp. The High Court agreed with the Commissioner that the OCNs were arrangements entered into for the purpose or with the effect of tax avoidance and declared them void. Consequently, Alesco NZ’s interest deductions for the years between 2003 and 2008 were disallowed; loss offset elections by companies within the Alesco NZ group in the years from 2003 to 2007 were reversed; Alesco NZ’s income tax for that period was reassessed; shortfall penalties levied; and use of money interest imposed. The taxpayers challenged the Commissioner’s assessments. The Court of Appeal’s decision The Court of Appeal emphasised two features of this appeal: 1. The Commissioner acknowledged the underlying commercial reasons for the advancement of monies to Alesco NZ to fund the acquisition of the two businesses. It was accepted that the  company had to raise funds to enable completion of these acquisitions. However, the Court noted that the “identification of a business purpose will not necessarily protect a transaction from scrutiny where tax avoidance is viewed as a significant or actuating purpose which has been pursued as a goal in itself”. The Commissioner’s challenge was to the permissibility of the OCN funding mechanism actually deployed. 2. When viewed in isolation, the OCN structure was technically compliant with the financial arrangements rules, the deductibility provisions relating to expenditure and interest then in force, and the spreading formula provided by Determination G22. The Court of Appeal’s reasons for dismissing Alesco NZ’s appeal were almost the same as those of the High Court in that they found the OCN financing arrangements resulted in tax avoidance because they gave rise to tax deductions available to reduce tax payable by Alesco NZ or Alesco NZ group companies. The Court noted that: ▪ Alesco NZ did not incur a real interest expense on the notes and the notional interest claimed did not represent a real economic cost. The manner in which Alesco NZ used the deductibility provisions fell outside the parameters of parliamentary contemplation. ▪ “Parliament did not intend that a taxpayer would be entitled to use the financial arrangements rules as a basis for claiming deductions for interest for which the taxpayer was not liable or did not pay. The rules were intended to operate as a net regime — that is, to bring to tax the amount yielded after deducting the entire economic cost from a taxpayer’s entire economic benefit … We are satisfied that the intended purview of the rules was to exclude notional transactions.” ▪ Disclosure of the true nature of the transaction did not necessarily mean that the cost reflected in the amortised interest had real economic substance or that it was the type of  cost that Parliament had contemplated would fall within the financial arrangements rules. ▪ Determination G22 was introduced to provide a method for allocating liabilities under the financial arrangements rules. The operation of the determination “presupposes that ‘amounts payable on the note’ will be a genuine cost because that is the commercial norm”. The terms of the determination did not alter the Court’s conclusion that Alesco NZ did not incur a real economic cost on the OCNs of the type contemplated by Parliament when providing for interest deductions under the financial arrangements rules. ▪ This case was not in the rare category where a taxpayer’s use of the deductibility provisions in a manner that was outside parliamentary contemplation could nevertheless result in the arrangement’s tax avoidance purpose or effect being merely incidental. ▪ If tax avoidance was found to have occurred, Alesco NZ argued that the Commissioner was obliged to perform a comparative analysis (eg using funding with interest bearing debt) to reconstruct the tax avoidance arrangement. This argument was dismissed by the Court who held that “the Commissioner may have regard to an alternative funding arrangement. But she is not bound to take that step and nor should she be where the tax advantage can be counteracted simply by disallowing the impermissible deductions”. However, “if the Commissioner had reconstructed by reference to another transaction, she was not obliged to adopt an interest bearing loan hypothetical as the likely alternative”. ▪ The Court confirmed they would “have reached the same conclusion on the OCNs by applying the statutory antiavoidance provisions in 2003 … we are satisfied that Alesco NZ’s position has always been unarguable”.  ▪ The OCNs were a tax avoidance arrangement. There was no purpose for Alesco to advance $78m to Alesco NZ interest free for 10 years under convertible notes except to secure a tax advantage by claiming expense deductions for notional interest payments. Accordingly, Alesco NZ entered into the transactions for the dominant purpose of avoiding tax and took an abusive tax position. ▪ The Commissioner was entitled to impose a shortfall penalty for taking an abusive tax position. See Alesco New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (2013) 26 NZTC ¶21-003. Implication of the decision and expert reaction The Court of Appeal noted that Alesco NZ’s appeal had wide fiscal consequences. The Commissioner had treated similar funding structures used by other entities as tax avoidance arrangements. Decisions on many of those disputed assessments awaited the result of this litigation. Alesco NZ was granted leave to appeal the decision to the Supreme Court and the case was due to be heard in February 2014. However, just prior to the hearing, it was announced that an out of court settlement had been reached with the Commissioner. The Court of Appeal decision is therefore the final decision. Karen Whitiskie, Director of Litigation Management at Inland Revenue, welcomed the decision, saying that “when Alesco New Zealand issued OCNs with zero per cent interest coupons attached and claimed a deduction for ‘interest’ expenditure, it acted outside the intended scope of financial arrangement rules and the relevant determination”. Many experts within the tax industry voiced their dismay at the Court upholding the Commissioner’s position on the use of OCNs in this case. It has long been accepted that a taxpayer could rely on determinations issued by the Commissioner. In this case the Commissioner wrote the determination outlining how the OCNs were to be treated for tax purposes and then appeared to use the general  anti-avoidance provision to overturn “black letter law” when it no longer approved of what the taxpayer was doing. Experts commented that this decision added to the increasing body of case law decided in the Commissioner’s favour, with the decision serving to create further uncertainty and angst for taxpayers trying to determine which commercial structures and funding options will be acceptable. The Frucor decision More recently, in the High Court decision in Frucor Suntory New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (2018) 28 NZTC ¶23-078, the taxpayer successfully argued that the use of convertible notes was not a tax avoidance arrangement. However, the Court of Appeal later overturned the decision in C of IR v Frucor Suntory New Zealand Ltd [2020] NZCA 383; (2020) 29 NZTC ¶24-075. ▸Note: The Supreme Court has granted Frucor leave to appeal against the Court of Appeal’s decision. In that case, the High Court held that the transaction had real and, from a New Zealand taxpayer perspective, legitimate economic drivers, primary among them offshore tax minimisation. It was selfevidently more “commercial” than the zero-coupon arrangements in Alesco. Interest was incurred by Frucor Holdings Ltd both legally and, at a single-entity level, economically and it was actually paid. The deduction did not depend on the taxpayer reverse engineering a deduction by application of the financial arrangements rules. Nor did the transaction involve back-to-back arrangements, each akin to the other, in the manner now typically assumed to infringe s BG 1. In assessing whether the transaction crossed the line between permissible arrangement and tax avoidance arrangement, the High Court accepted that Parliament contemplated the use of OCNs and that the coupons on them, if calculated at an arm’s length rate, would ordinarily be deductible. In addition, Parliament was agnostic about the use of convertible note structures between parent and subsidiary. The “no cost” proposition that underpinned the Commissioner’s expert evidence and her submissions did not establish avoidance.  Payment of cash by a parent to a subsidiary, for which the consideration was the issue of additional shares, represented a routine commercial transaction. The financial arrangements rules, determinations and other aspects of the legislative and regulatory framework pointed to Parliament recognising the issue of shares by subsidiary to parent as economically real, irrespective of the “economic cost” to the subsidiary. However, the Commissioner successfully appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Commissioner submitted the High Court did not carry out the second stage of the Ben Nevis enquiry, instead adopting a “threshold” approach in which there was no room for s BG 1 if the specific provisions were met. By focusing on the legal form of the transactions and their “black letter” law compliance, the Judge failed to examine the economic substance of the arrangement, wrongly concluding that to do so would involve taxation by economic equivalence. The Court of Appeal concluded that when the economic and commercial effect of the funding arrangement was examined in its context, it became clear that tax avoidance was its principal purpose or effect or, at least, tax avoidance was not merely an incidental purpose or effect. By entering into the funding arrangement, Frucor achieved a $66m interest deduction without incurring a corresponding economic cost for which Parliament intended deductions would be available. As a matter of commercial and economic reality, $55m of the claimed interest represented the repayment of principal borrowed from Deutsche Bank and was not an interest cost. In the Court of Appeal’s opinion, the funding arrangement came within the Supreme Court’s formulation in Ben Nevis as one enabling the taxpayer to gain the benefit of the specific provision in an artificial and contrived way. The transaction was in many respects artificial and it was clearly contrived for the very purpose of enabling Frucor to gain the benefit of the specific provision allowing interest deductions. The artificial and contrived features of the funding arrangement were not seriously in dispute. Taken together, they revealed that the purpose of the arrangement was to dress up a  subscription for equity as an interest-only loan to achieve a tax advantage. It was hard to discern any rational commercial explanation for the artificial and contrived features of the arrangement, other than tax avoidance. Specific determinations Several specific determinations on optional convertible notes have also been released.  BASE PRICE ADJUSTMENT ¶6-358 Base price adjustment required under FA rules Overview of base price adjustment A party to a financial arrangement must calculate a base price adjustment if required to do so. The base price adjustment calculation is made when a person ceases to be a party to the financial arrangement. Typically, that will be when there is a disposal or maturity of the financial arrangement. The base price adjustment must be made by a cash basis person who has been relieved of the requirement to apply a spreading method to the financial arrangement. The calculation is also required if the person ceases to be resident in New Zealand or the financial arrangement becomes statute barred. The base price adjustment is in the nature of a “wash up” calculation intended to identify any income or expenditure under the financial arrangement that has not already been revealed by the spreading method or the method applied by a cash basis person. The base price adjustment is stated to be the third purpose of the financial arrangements rules (see ¶6-010). A spreading method applied in past years to the financial arrangement is not also applied for the income year in which calculation of the base price adjustment is made.  The formula for the base price adjustment is set out at ¶6-360. The main ingredients of the calculation are consideration, income, expenditure and any amount remitted. A calculation that produces a positive result is income derived, with a negative amount treated as expenditure incurred. The topic of consideration is addressed at ¶6-370. Consideration encompasses what is paid or received, with specific rules for an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services and a specified option (see ¶6-400). When base price adjustment required Maturity A party to a financial arrangement must calculate a base price adjustment as at the date on which the financial arrangement matures. Maturity is defined in s YA 1 to mean: ▪ the date on which an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or an option ends, or ▪ in any other case, the date on which the last payment contingent on the financial arrangement is made. An example of the second of these possibilities would be the repayment in full of a loan. It is recognised that small amounts could be left outstanding to avoid an arrangement reaching maturity and the requirement to undertake a base price adjustment calculation. However, a financial arrangement will be treated as having matured if amounts unpaid under the financial arrangement are immaterial and the arrangement has been structured to avoid the application of the base price adjustment formula. A taxpayer whose investment of $15,000 in Equiticorp debentures returned a little over $5,000 failed to have the balance deducted as a loss. The investment was found not to have matured or to have been remitted for the purposes of the cash basis holder provisions until a final payment was made by Equiticorp under the terms of the investment. That had not yet occurred. See Case S23 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,162.  In Case 2/2016 (2016) 27 NZTC ¶3-024, the TRA held that payment of an amount of an assigned debt was made to a taxpayer by the crediting of that amount to the taxpayer’s current account. This was the last payment due under the deed of assignment. Accordingly, the financial arrangement matured and a base price adjustment was required. On appeal, however, the High Court allowed the appeal by the taxpayer and held that there was no sum of money to constitute payment, but rather an assignment of debt. Because there was no final payment under a financial arrangement, the base price adjustment had not been triggered. See Fugle v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-069. The Court of Appeal upheld the High Court decision, holding that the crediting to a shareholder’s current account of an amount greater than the funds then available to the company was not the last payment contingent on the financial arrangement. The financial arrangement had therefore not matured and the base price adjustment was not triggered. Payment in full was not made in this case until the full amount was unconditionally available to be drawn down. See C of IR v Fugle (2017) 28 NZTC ¶23-017. The Commissioner has commented that a company that has issued financial arrangements, and that later repurchases all outstanding financial arrangements, must calculate the base price adjustment in the year of repurchase. The debt instrument has reached maturity and the company is obliged to return all income and expenditure attributable to the financial arrangements. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 9, February 1995 at 10. Disposal A party to a financial arrangement who disposes of the financial arrangement must calculate a base price adjustment as at the date of disposal. The normal meaning of disposal is alienation. This concept involves dealing in property, with the property remaining in existence. See FC of T v Cooling 90 ATC 4472. In another case, the Court stated that a disposal for capital gains tax purposes includes a transfer of an asset by one person to another. The capital gains tax regime presupposes that there was an asset immediately before the  disposal, and that the disposer owned it. See Kirby (HMIT) v Thorn EMI plc [1987] BTC 462. In Auckland Harbour Board v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,433 (CA), the Court of Appeal held that a financial arrangement was not sold or otherwise transferred by a person in circumstances in which financial arrangements vested in another party pursuant to regulations implementing a local government reorganisation. The notion of disposal in the context of a conversion of a transferable term fishing quota into an individual term quota is discussed by the Commissioner in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 3, March 2000 at 20. Absolute assignment An absolute assignment of all rights under the financial arrangement gives rise to a requirement to calculate a base price adjustment as at the date of the assignment. However, the base price adjustment is not required if part of the consideration for the assignment is deferred. Consequently, the base price adjustment is not calculated if any part of the consideration for the assignment is left outstanding as a debt owing. Legal defeasance A legal defeasance of all obligations owed under a financial arrangement gives rise to a requirement to calculate a base price adjustment as at the date of the defeasance. A legal defeasance is the release of a party’s primary obligations under a financial arrangement or an excepted financial arrangement in circumstances in which the release is formally acknowledged by the creditor, the creditor’s trustee or agent or is established by legal judgment. Sale to an associate (debt parking) A base price adjustment is also required in a “debt parking” situation. A debtor in financial difficulties may arrange for the creditor to transfer the debt to an associated person of the debtor. To “park” the debt with the associate may have the benefit of preventing the base price adjustment revealing income in the hands of the debtor through the inability to repay the debt in full. The debtor is required to  calculate a base price adjustment if the debt is sold to the associate at a discount to a face value of 20% or more. For the purposes of the calculation, the debtor is treated as having paid the amount of the consideration the associate paid to the creditor and the associate is treated as having made an interest-free loan to the debtor. See further at ¶6-410. Discharge without consideration A base price adjustment is required if a party to a financial arrangement is discharged from making all remaining payments without fully adequate consideration. This category of base price adjustment relates to situations in which there is a forgiveness of debt. Under a forgiveness of debt, the creditor formally releases the obligations owed by the debtor. To achieve a forgiveness of debt, as the Commissioner notes in “Gift duty — a guide for legal and tax practitioners” (IR 195), Inland Revenue, March 2012, p 14, a release by deed is necessary. That view is based on C of IR v Morris [1958] NZLR 1126. In that case, the Court of Appeal noted that a well-established principle of law is that a release of debt is not effective unless made under seal or unless some valuable consideration is given in return for the release. In light of that principle, the Supreme Court of Western Australia held in Gardner v Commr of Probate (WA) [1967] WAR 106 that there had been no release of a debt despite appropriate entries in the debtor’s books and the payment of gift duty to the Commissioner. The contrary view adopted in Case N70 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,550 may need to be reconsidered. An exception, noted by the Commissioner in IR 195, is that a debt will be released when a creditor acknowledges in writing the receipt of part of the debt in satisfaction of the whole debt (s 92 of the Judicature Act 1908). Release by operation of law A party to a financial arrangement must calculate a base price adjustment as at the date of release from the obligation to make any remaining payments under the financial arrangement pursuant to the Insolvency Act 2006, the Companies Act 1993 or a foreign law.  A discharge from bankruptcy operates as a release of all debts provable in the bankruptcy. That is subject to limited exceptions for debts incurred through fraud and debts for child support. Upon the release, the bankrupt is treated as having paid the released debt. See s 304 of the Insolvency Act 2006. This treatment achieves the social policy objective of “wiping the slate clean” upon a discharge from bankruptcy. Although the base price adjustment calculation is to be made, all outstanding amounts are treated as having been paid, with the consequence that the unpaid debt would not become financial arrangement income under a base price adjustment. A different regime applies to an insolvent company. A company in liquidation is ultimately removed from the register rather than being released from its debts. The act of removal from the register may effectively operate to release the obligation to make any remaining payments owed but, at that point, the debtor company will no longer exist. The base price adjustment may generate income derived, but there is no person to satisfy the ensuing tax liability. In the routine case, neither the directors nor the shareholders of the company could be expected to assume that liability. However, in other cases, s HD 15 may apply. See ¶16-880. Composition with creditors A base price adjustment must be calculated as at the date the debtor is released from making all remaining payments under the arrangement by a deed or agreement of composition with creditors. The base price adjustment calculated upon a composition with creditors can be expected to produce income derived. The composition connotes that the debtor is unable to meet in full the debtor’s obligations, including those owed under a financial arrangement. A further expectation is that the debtor submitting to the compromise will be unable to satisfy the ensuing tax liability. Most, if not all, of the debtor’s assets will have been disposed of under the composition with creditors. The composition will leave the debtor vulnerable to bankruptcy upon the petition of the Commissioner. Lapse of time  A party to a financial arrangement must calculate a base price adjustment as at the date on which all remaining payments under the financial arrangement become irrecoverable or unenforceable through the lapse of time. A debt becomes statute barred once the limitation period has expired. This is normally six years after the date of the act or omission on which the money claim is based. However, note that this may be extended to 15 years in certain circumstances if the claimant has late knowledge of the claim. For judgment debts, the limitation period used to be 12 years, but it was reduced to six. See ss 11 and 35 of the Limitation Act 2010. Under the limitation rule, legal proceedings to enforce payment of the debt cannot be commenced after the applicable period. The debt remains on foot, because it is not deemed to be extinguished. Ceasing to be resident A base price adjustment must be calculated by a person who ceases to be resident in New Zealand. The calculation must be made as at the date of cessation of residence. This requirement is subject to the following two exceptions: ▪ a cash basis person who ceases to be a New Zealand resident before the first day of the fourth income year following the income year in which they first became a New Zealand resident does not calculate a base price adjustment for any financial arrangement held before and after the period of New Zealand residence (so that a base price adjustment is still required for a financial arrangement acquired during New Zealand residence and retained upon the cessation of that status), and ▪ a person who ceases to be resident in New Zealand does not calculate a base price adjustment to the extent to which a financial arrangement relates to a business the person carries on through a fixed establishment in New Zealand (encompassing, for example, a company that ceases to be resident in New Zealand upon its migration to another country but that, nonetheless, retains a branch business in New Zealand  with financial arrangements as part of the assets or liabilities of the branch). Ceasing to be party When a non-resident person is a party to a financial arrangement for the purpose of a business carried on through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, that non-resident must calculate a base price adjustment when they cease to be a party to the arrangement. Changing from certain methods A base price adjustment is required when a party to a financial arrangement changes from: ▪ the fair value method and the financial arrangement is not subject to a creditor workout, or ▪ the market value to an IFRS method. The base price adjustment must be calculated for the first income year for which a changed method is used. It is calculated as at the end of the year of change to the new method so that in the year of change the only income or expenditure is the base price adjustment: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 61. See s EW 29(13) and ¶6-370. Cessation of LTCs and dissolution of partnerships If a person is party to a financial arrangement in their capacity as owner or partner of a look-through company or partnership and they are also a party in another capacity (private capacity), they must calculate a base price adjustment as at the date of disposal of the financial arrangement on the cessation of the LTC or dissolution of the partnership. The base price adjustment is calculated in their private capacity. See s EW 29(14). Deceased estate  The administrator or executor of a deceased estate with assets that include a financial arrangement may become subject to two obligations to calculate a base price adjustment. These are that the administrator must make the calculation: ▪ as at the date of death, as if the deceased had disposed of the financial arrangement on that date, and ▪ when the administrator subsequently distributes the financial arrangement to a specific legatee or a residuary beneficiary. If the deceased person was a cash basis person and the trustee of the deceased’s estate is a cash basis person, the financial arrangement is valued at cost and not at its market value. See s FC 8. The second of the calculations is made on the basis that the administrator acquired the financial arrangement as at the date of death and disposed of it upon the distribution. When base price adjustment not required Section EW 30 specifically states that a base price adjustment is not to be calculated by: ▪ a cash basis person who ceases to be resident in New Zealand before the first day of the fourth income year following the income year in which the person first became a New Zealand resident, for a financial arrangement that is held both before and after having New Zealand resident status ▪ a person who ceases to be a New Zealand resident for any financial arrangement that relates to a business the party carries on through a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ the creditor under a financial arrangement that is subject to a legal defeasance if the defeasance requires another person to meet the remaining obligations of the arrangement ▪ a debtor whose obligations under a financial arrangement are the subject of an absolute legal defeasance where some or all of the consideration for the defeasance is deferred, and  ▪ a creditor under a financial arrangement whose rights are subject to an absolute assignment but some or all of the consideration for the assignment is deferred. Law: IT07 ss EW 28–EW 30, FC 8, YA 1  ¶6-360 Base price adjustment calculation The base price adjustment formula for a party to a financial arrangement is: consideration − income + expenditure + amount remitted where: consideration is all consideration that has been paid, and all consideration that is or will be payable, to the person for or under the financial arrangement, minus all consideration that has been paid, and all consideration that is or will be payable, by the person for or under the financial arrangement (ignoring non-contingent fees, if the relevant method is not the IFRS financial reporting method, and non-integral fees, if the relevant method is the IFRS financial reporting method or the modified fair value method) Note that if any of ss EW 32 to EW 48 or EZ 52D applies, the consideration is adjusted under the relevant section. income is income derived by the person under the financial arrangement in earlier income years, dividends derived by the person from the release of the obligation to repay the amount lent, and any suspensory loan remission expenditure is expenditure incurred by the person under the financial arrangement in earlier income years amount remitted is an amount that is not included in the consideration paid or payable to the person because it has been remitted by the person or by operation of law, but does not  include a remission that is a self-remission for a look-through company owner or a partner (see ¶19-222). A non-contingent fee is a fee for services provided for a person becoming a party to a financial arrangement and that is payable irrespective of whether the financial arrangement proceeds. A nonintegral fee is a fee or transaction cost that, for the purposes of financial reporting, is not an integral part of the effective interest rate of a financial arrangement. The deduction under the income item for a company releasing a debt owed to it by a shareholder ensures that there is no double taxation of the release. The release is a dividend and not also financial arrangement income under the base price adjustment. Consideration To calculate a base price adjustment for a financial arrangement, it is necessary to take into account the consideration payable under the financial arrangement. The topic of consideration is addressed in considerable detail by the financial arrangements rules. Specific aspects that are discussed are the following: ▪ consideration paid to or by a person upon exit from and entry into the financial arrangements rules together with a disposal for inadequate consideration: see ¶6-370 ▪ consideration under an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or a specified option: see ¶6-400 ▪ consideration under a debt-parking arrangement: see ¶6-410 ▪ consideration where debt is released for natural love and affection: see ¶6-420 ▪ consideration upon a release of debt by statute: see ¶6-430. Result of base price adjustment calculation The calculation will produce an amount that is nil, positive or negative. The consequences are the following:  ▪ a positive amount is income derived except to the extent of nondeductible expenditure under the financial arrangement in previous income years (see ¶5-263) ▪ a negative amount is expenditure incurred for which a deduction is allowed (see ¶10-452), and ▪ a nil amount is neither income nor a deduction. Example 1: A Co issues B Co with a five-year debenture with a face value of $30,000 for $30,000. The stock pays 8% in arrears. Financial arrangement income and expenditure on a yield to maturity basis is $2,400 per annum. In the middle of the term of the stock, and before the interest payment is made in the third year, B Co sells the stock to a third party. The value of the stock has declined to $27,000, as general interest rates have risen. The base price adjustment for B Co will be: consideration − income + expenditure + amount remitted determined as follows: ▪ consideration = $1,800, being $27,000 plus the interest income for the past two years of $4,800 less the $30,000 lent by B Co ▪ income = $4,800, the income derived in previous years ▪ expenditure = nil, and ▪ no amount has been remitted. The base price adjustment for B Co is: $1,800 − $4,800 + $0 + $0 = ($3,000). The negative amount is expenditure incurred. B Co will have an allowable deduction, because the ($3,000) arises from income derived by B Co in previous years, which is not otherwise allowed as a deduction. For A Co, when the financial arrangement matures after five years, the base price adjustment will be as follows: ▪ consideration = ($12,000), being the $30,000 paid to A Co less the $12,000 paid by A Co in interest and the $30,000 paid by A Co ▪ income = nil ▪ expenditure = $9,600 (four years × interest of $2,400 pa), the amount incurred by A Co in previous years, and ▪ no amounts have been remitted.  The result for A Co is: ($12,000) − $0 + $9,600 + $0 = ($2,400). The negative amount is expenditure incurred for which a deduction is allowed.  The position of the creditor under a financial arrangement that is subject to a legal defeasance is also addressed. It is confirmed that when the creditor comes to calculate the base price adjustment, the calculation must include the consideration received from the party who assumed the obligations of the original debtor. As a consequence, the consideration for the purposes of the calculation encompasses what was received from both debtors. See s EW 47. One objective of calculation of the base price adjustment appears to be to identify as income, in the hands of a debtor, the amount of any release of debt. Example 2: PR Ltd has a debt of $300,000 owed to LO Ltd but is unable to repay the debt in full. PR Ltd arranges a payment of 50¢ in the dollar in full and final satisfaction of the debt. PR Ltd must calculate a base price adjustment to identify any financial arrangement income now that the financial arrangement has matured according to the settlement agreement. Calculation of the base price adjustment for PR Ltd is as follows: consideration − income + expenditure + amount remitted where: ▪ consideration = $150,000, being the consideration paid or payable to PR Ltd of $300,000 less the consideration paid by PR Ltd of $150,000 ▪ income = 0 ▪ expenditure = 0, and ▪ amount remitted = 0. The base price adjustment for PR Ltd is: $150,000 − $0 + $0 + $0 = $150,000 The result of $150,000 is financial arrangement income for PR Ltd.  There are exceptions to an outcome of this kind. The release of debt in consideration of natural love and affection and upon discharge from bankruptcy does not result in financial arrangement income. The release of debt also raises gift duty implications. Where the release occurs in the context of a debtor who is insolvent, there may be no inadequacy of consideration that attracts gift duty. The release confers no benefit on the debtor, because the insolvency indicates that there is no capacity to repay. Public binding ruling BR Pub 14/07, “Interest repayments required as a result of the early repayment of a financial arrangement — deductibility”, addresses when a base price adjustment is required where the amount of interest paid is reduced as a result of the early repayment of a term deposit. Where there is a full withdrawal of the term deposit before contract maturity, a base price adjustment is required and the amount of interest repaid is included in the “consideration” element of the base price adjustment. Where there is a partial withdrawal of a term deposit, a base price adjustment is not required. The ruling applies indefinitely from 17 December 2013 and is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 10, November 2014 at 3. Law: IT07 ss EW 31, EW 47, EZ 52D  ¶6-370 Consideration paid to or by the person in BPA calculation In a number of situations, the consideration paid to or by a party to a financial arrangement is specifically addressed. The situations cover exit from and entry into the financial arrangements rules together with a disposal for an inadequate consideration. The tenor of the treatment is to ascribe the receipt or payment, as appropriate, with a market value consideration. The provisions on consideration contain a number of references to the accrued entitlement or the accrued obligation of a party to a financial arrangement. These are defined as follows:  ▪ an accrued entitlement means a party’s rights under a financial arrangement at a particular time ▪ an accrued obligation means a party’s obligations under a financial arrangement at a particular time. In both instances, the meaning presumably is the monetary expression of the rights and obligations rather than merely a legal analysis of them. The meaning of the concept of consideration under general principles is referred to at ¶6-045. Exit from the financial arrangements rules A party to a financial arrangement who exits from the financial arrangements rules may be treated as having been paid the market value of accrued entitlements (s EW 36), or having paid the market value of accrued obligations (s EW 40), under the financial arrangement at that time. This treatment applies in any one of the following situations: ▪ the cessation of New Zealand residence where the financial arrangement is not held for the purpose of a business carried on through a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ the financial arrangement ceases to be held by a non-resident for the purpose of a business carried on through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, or ▪ the financial arrangement becomes classified as an excepted financial arrangement in the form of a borrower’s foreign currency loan, a private or domestic option to acquire property, or a private or domestic agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services, because the person starts to use the financial arrangement for a private or domestic purpose. In the case of a party with accrued entitlements, this treatment ensures that the party to the financial arrangement is imputed with having received the market value of any unpaid amounts as at the date on which the financial arrangement ceases to be subject to the  financial arrangements rules. This enables calculation of the base price adjustment to be made on the basis of that notional receipt, without taking into account payments due at a future time when the financial arrangements rules no longer have application to the financial arrangement. In the case of a party with accrued obligations, the person is imputed with having paid the market value of the person’s accrued obligations at the particular time. To extinguish the obligations, the person is also treated as having been relieved of them. Entering the financial arrangements rules A person may be treated as having been paid the market value of accrued obligations (s EW 37) or having paid the market value of accrued entitlements (s EW 41) at the stage at which a financial arrangement becomes subject to the financial arrangements rules. This treatment may be applied in any of the following situations: ▪ the person is a non-resident who becomes a party to the arrangement for the purpose of a business carried on by the person through a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ the person is a non-resident who becomes a New Zealand resident who is not a transitional resident, and is not, immediately before becoming a New Zealand resident, a party to the arrangement for the purpose of a business carried on by the person through a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ the person is a transitional resident for whom the arrangement ceases to be an excepted financial arrangement described in s EW 5(17) ▪ the person is a transitional resident who becomes a New Zealand resident who is not a transitional resident, resulting in the arrangement ceasing to be an excepted financial arrangement described in s EW 5(17), or ▪ the person stops using the arrangement for a private or domestic purpose, resulting in the arrangement ceasing to be an  excepted financial arrangement described in any of s EW 5(18) to (20). The effect of this treatment is to divide a financial arrangement into those components that are subject to the financial arrangements rules and those that are not. In the case of accrued obligations, the party to the financial arrangement is treated as having been paid the market value of the accrued obligations at that time and having assumed the obligations immediately after that time. In the case of accrued entitlements, the party to the financial arrangement is treated as having paid the market value of the accrued entitlements at the particular time and as having acquired the accrued entitlement immediately after that time. Disposal for inadequate or non-monetary consideration A person who disposes of a financial arrangement incorporating an accrued entitlement for a non-monetary or inadequate consideration is treated under s EW 38 as having been paid the market value of the accrued entitlements. A person who acquires a financial arrangement for a non-monetary or inadequate consideration is treated under s EW 42 as having paid the market value of the accrued entitlements at the date of acquisition. This treatment may apply, for example, to the gift of a financial arrangement in the form of a debt investment. As lender, the donor of the gift would have an accrued entitlement to be repaid the principal together with interest accrued but not paid. The donor is treated as having been paid those entitlements. This treatment ensures that calculation of the base price adjustment will not result in a negative amount that is expenditure incurred. Consideration affected by unfavourable factors In some situations, s EW 39 requires that the consideration received upon the disposal of a financial arrangement is to be determined by ignoring any decline in the borrower’s creditworthiness. The person is treated as having been paid the market value of the accrued entitlements as at the date of disposal.  This treatment applies where the consideration for disposal of the financial arrangement is affected by one of the following factors: ▪ a decline in the creditworthiness of the other party to the financial arrangement after it was entered into ▪ an increased possibility after the financial arrangement was entered into that the other party will not meet its obligations, or ▪ the occurrence of an event reducing or cancelling the obligations of the other party. The provisions on the decline in creditworthiness may be regarded as a limitation on the circumstances in which a base price adjustment will produce a negative amount that is expenditure incurred. Although the decline in creditworthiness could be expected to give rise to a monetary loss upon disposal of the financial arrangement, that loss is effectively disregarded by the financial arrangements rules. This treatment does not apply to a person whose business includes holding or dealing in financial arrangements of the class disposed of, provided that the person is not associated with the other party to the financial arrangement. Change from fair value method When a person is required to perform a base price adjustment as a result of the person changing from the fair value method of spreading income, the person is treated as having been paid, at the end of the first income year for which the replacement method is used, an amount of consideration equal to the financial arrangement’s market value on that date. See s EW 46B, which was amended to clarify the timing of the base price adjustment in these circumstances. Cessation of LTCs and dissolution of partnerships When a person is required to perform a base price adjustment in their private capacity under s EW 29(14) on cessation of a lookthrough company or dissolution of a partnership (see ¶6-358) and  the person has an accrued entitlement, the consideration is limited to their owner’s or partner’s interest. The person is treated as: ▪ having paid the consideration multiplied by the proportion of their owner’s interest or partner’s interest in the financial arrangement in their non-private capacity, and ▪ having been paid the market value of the accrued entitlement on the date of disposal multiplied by the proportion of their owner’s or partner’s interest. Law: IT07 ss EW 36–EW 39, EW 46B, EW 47B  ¶6-400 Agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services and a specified option and FA rules The value of property or services for an original party to a financial arrangement in the form of an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or a specified option is based upon the lowest price, a cash price, a future or discounted value or a value determined by the Commissioner. A hierarchical approach is taken. These prescribed methods of determining value are considered in their sequential order until one of them applies. With the exception of foreign currency agreements for the sale and purchase of property or services (foreign currency ASAPs), discussed below, the consequence of the hierarchical approach is that a lowest price concept is the first possibility, the cash price is the second possibility, the future or discounted value is the third possibility and the amount determined by the Commissioner is the fourth possibility. The lowest price provisions are supported by rules on currency conversion where the financial arrangement is in a foreign currency. The rules for determining value do not have application if the agreement or option has lapsed or does not proceed. This value calculation is designed to provide a mechanism to isolate any interest component and ensure it is spread in accordance with the financial arrangements rules. Only the interest element is  brought within the rules. Any change in value of the property that is the subject of the agreement is disregarded. The same rules apply for the purposes of the regimes governing a finance lease (see ¶6-700) and a hire purchase agreement (see ¶6740). Further, a party to an arrangement of these kinds may pay or be paid consideration for the lease agreement. In this case, the consideration includes any expenditure or loss incurred by the lessor in preparing and installing the asset for use, to the extent that it has not already been taken into account (see s EW 33). Lowest price The value of property or services is the lowest price the parties would have agreed to on the date on which the agreement was entered into, if payment in full had been required at the time at which the first right in the property was transferred, or the services provided. There is an important qualification for an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services. For a financial arrangement of that kind, the lowest price provisions cannot apply if the agreement is part of another financial arrangement. In that case, one of the remaining methods for determining the value of property or services must be applied to determine the consideration. In these provisions, the notion of a “right” means any one of the following: ▪ a right to possess the property ▪ a right to income derived from the property ▪ a right to control or influence the disposal of income derived from the property ▪ a right, directly or indirectly, to make a decision about the property ▪ a right, directly or indirectly, to influence a person making a decision about the property, or ▪ any other right of a substantially similar nature.  It does not include the mere right to enforce the agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or the specified option. Thus, the value of property or services will be the lowest price the parties would have agreed upon at the time of entering into the agreement if payment had been required in full at the time the first of any of the above rights in the property was transferred. In many cases, this will be at the time when there is a legal change in possession or ownership of the property in question. In other cases, the crucial time may be the time at which the right to any income generated from the property passes. In one case, it was held that the right to the income from a business subject to a sale agreement did not pass upon the execution of a conditional agreement for sale and purchase, despite the parties agreeing for that to be the case. The High Court held that the right to the income from the business passed to the purchaser not when the agreement was signed, but only when it became “highly probable” that the conditions would be satisfied and that the sale and purchase would settle. In the case under consideration, that was three days prior to settlement. See GPO Holdings Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,429. Specific agreement on lowest price Ideally, a specific clause should be inserted into an agreement specifying the lowest price. However, the absence of a specific agreement by the parties on the lowest price does not necessarily prevent application of the lowest price concept. The lowest price is what the parties would have agreed upon at the relevant time, despite any omission to specifically agree on the lowest price. That was the view taken in relation to a transaction that occurred as a part of a nationwide port restructuring process. The taxpayer was the purchaser of harbour board assets, but the purchase was subject to considerable delays on account of legal challenges and difficulties in resolving valuation issues. The taxpayer entered into possession of its intended port assets on 1 October 1988 pending resolution of the issues and commenced to operate the port business. Some 12 months later, the parties agreed upon a  purchase price of $34m. The High Court found that the lowest price concept applied. The statutory provisions require a subjective consideration of what the lowest price was that the parties would have agreed to for the transfer of the property on 1 October 1988 when the taxpayer took possession of the assets. The fact that the parties had not specifically turned their minds to a deferral of settlement, or what the lowest price may have been for the purposes of the Income Tax Act 1976, did not change the matter. The correct approach was to ascertain the lowest price the parties would have agreed upon at the date on which possession was given. The purchase price eventually determined of $34m was the lowest price. There was no suggestion that it contained an interest element and nor was there any evidence that a lower price would have been acceptable. See Lyttelton Port Co Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,556. Commissioner’s views The Commissioner has published his views on the lowest price concept. The Commissioner said that the lowest price concept addresses: ▪ the intention of both the parties to the agreement for the sale and purchase of property or the specified option ▪ the particular purchaser negotiating the price for the property rather than any purchaser so that there is a contrast with the definition of cash price used in the Credit Contracts Act 1981 and its concentration on the price at which the property would be sold to any purchaser, and ▪ the time at which the rights in the property, the subject of the agreement, are to be transferred, with the date of transfer being the time at which the lowest price should be determined. Since the test is a subjective one, Inland Revenue (IR) cannot ignore a lowest price that has been genuinely agreed between the parties. If the parties have agreed upon a lowest price which results in an interest rate of 9%, IR cannot ignore that because it considers that a  rate of 15% is a more realistic market rate. The test, however, is the lowest price that the parties would have agreed upon, not the lowest price that the parties state that they agreed upon. IR may consider the objective facts to determine whether the parties have genuinely agreed to the price they assert. The situation is similar to that where a person asserts that he or she is in business. In that situation, IR can look to the objective facts for assistance in determining whether the person genuinely had a profit motive despite the person’s assertion. The fact that the test is a subjective one does not mean that it is decided purely on the claims of the person. The test is what the parties really agreed upon, not what they claimed to have agreed. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 3, October 1991 at 8. The following examples to illustrate the lowest price concept were also given by the Commissioner in his discussion of the topic. Example 1: A taxpayer with accumulated losses of $400,000 sells a capital asset for a deferred payment of $500,000. The asset is valued at $450,000. Possession of the asset is to pass immediately and payment is to take place in 18 months. The parties state in the agreement for sale and purchase that the lowest price they would have agreed upon for immediate payment is $100,000. The objective facts, however, suggest that the lowest price was asserted by the parties in order to transfer the advantage of the vendor’s tax losses. In this situation, unless there is some compelling evidence, Inland Revenue would not accept the taxpayers’ assertions that $100,000 was the lowest price they would have agreed upon.  Example 2: One company sells another company a building for $10m with payment to take place 12 months after possession passes. In most circumstances, Inland Revenue would not accept that $10m was the lowest price that the parties would agree upon if payment was made when the first right in the property passed. The parties may assert this but, in many cases, the surrounding circumstances would not support the assertion. Assuming that the taxpayers are commercially sophisticated, it would be reasonable to assume that they had considered the time value of money. If the compensation in the nature of interest was disguised in the purchase price, it would be open to the Commissioner to challenge the price agreed.  Example 3: A parent sells a child a farm for $1m, with the purchase price left outstanding for 10 years. The lowest price agreed upon between the parties when possession of the property passed was $1m. The transaction is in substance a 10-year interest-free loan. In the case of such intra-family dealings, Inland Revenue may accept that the $1m was the lowest price agreed upon. The extension of credit is based on the natural love and affection that the parent has for the child. The parties have not turned their minds to the time value of money. It has no relevance to their relationship.  ASAP part of another financial arrangement An original party to an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services cannot apply the lowest price provisions if the agreement is part of another financial arrangement. This qualification to application of the lowest price provisions appears to have been incorporated to address avoidance concerns. In the course of discussing the concept of a composite financial arrangement comprising a number of financial arrangements, the Commissioner remarked that a consequence of the broad definition of a financial arrangement is that groups of inter-related financial arrangements, which may not be financial arrangements separately, may fall within the definition. Inter-related arrangements are those in which there is a degree of interdependency between the transactions. It is, therefore, appropriate that they be covered by the rules if they have the same effect as debt instruments or debt substitutes. Accordingly, the lowest price concept for agreements for the sale and purchase of property or services does not apply if it is part of a wider financial arrangement. A wider financial arrangement containing a group of inter-related arrangements cannot be properly characterised as an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services, even though some of the constituent arrangements may be. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 6, July 1999 at 10. Unfortunately, the Commissioner did not elaborate on why it is that all inter-related arrangements, of themselves, should be regarded as debt substitutes. In a transaction that predominantly involves the sale and purchase of property, or the provision of services, it may not be obvious why the asset or services features of the transaction are  debt substitutes. The parties, presumably, wish to transfer assets or services as a fundamental objective of their dealings. Credit contract cash price In the absence of the application of the lowest price provisions, the value of property or services is the cash price of the property or services as determined under s 5 of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act 2003. This is provided that the Act has application to the agreement in question. The concept of the cash price in the credit contracts statute is defined as follows: cash price, in relation to property sold or leased, or to services provided under a contract, means — (a) the lowest price at which a person could have purchased that property or those services from the vendor, lessor, or provider on the basis of payment in full at the time the contract was made; or (b) if there is no price in accordance with paragraph (a), the fair market value of that property or those services at the time the contract was made. The cash price provisions raise the issue of whether the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act will have application to the agreement, option or lease in question. Part 5 of the Act applies to every credit contract irrespective of whether it is a consumer credit contract. See s 117 of that Act. A credit contract is one under which credit is or may be provided, while the notion of credit is defined in s 6 as the right to defer payment of a debt, to incur a debt and defer its payment, or to purchase property or services and defer payment for the purchase (in whole or in part). Since the notion of a credit contract parallels the definition of a financial arrangement in the form of an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services, it is arguable that the cash price concept is applicable to an agreement of that kind. Future or discounted value  In the absence of the application of the lowest price and cash price provisions, the value of the property or services is the future value, the discounted value or a combination of the two of the amounts paid or payable on the date on which the first right in the property is transferred or the services are provided as stated in one of the Commissioner’s determinations. Determination G17B: “Deferred Property Settlements Denominated in New Zealand Currency” can be expected to be the most relevant determination. Other possibilities are Determination G16A: “Discounted Value of Amounts Payable in Relation to Trade Credits Denominated in New Zealand Currency” and Determination G21A: “Agreements for Sale and Purchase of Property Denominated in Foreign Currency: Discounted Value of Amounts Payable”. Determination G17B is not applicable to all deferred property agreements. Perhaps the main exclusion is for an agreement that provides that more than 20% of the purchase price is payable at least 31 days before the date on which the first right in the property is transferred. A specific determination In the absence of the application of the lowest price concept, the cash price concept or one of the Commissioner’s determinations, the value of the property or services is that stated in one of the Commissioner’s determinations or a binding ruling specifically addressing the agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services in question. Both parties to the agreement must apply the amounts stated in the determination. Denomination in a foreign currency Where the agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or a specified option is denominated in a foreign currency, the price may be converted into New Zealand currency using one of the following rates: ▪ a rate available from a registered bank on the date on which the first right in the property is to be transferred (or expected to be transferred if that date is uncertain)  ▪ a rate available from a registered bank for the date of final payment (or the expected final payment date if that date is uncertain) but only if the period between transfer of the first right in the property and the final payment is not more than five years, or ▪ a rate approved in one of the Commissioner’s determinations. Taxpayers who use IFRS to prepare their financial statements almost always use the accounting valuation of the property or services in foreign currency ASAPs as the tax cost for depreciation purposes. They also use the accounting results to spread income and expenditure under foreign currency ASAPs. The income or expenditure included in the financial statements for foreign currency ASAPs is generally any recognised interest. The valuation and spreading rules for foreign currency ASAPs incorporate the effect of IFRS designated FX hedging of foreign exchange amounts in the financial statements. There are some legislative modifications to the use of the accounting results for determining the value of the property or services (see ss EW 32(2)–(2E), EW 33B, EW 33C, EW 33D and EW 34). These modifications generally only apply to hedges of certain transactions , and to certain amounts of contingent consideration on the sale and purchase of a business combination. Non-IFRS taxpayers generally use spot foreign exchange rates to convert amounts paid to value property or services included in foreign currency ASAPs. Interest income or expenditure arises in two situations: ▪ interest may be commercially agreed and expressly included in the terms of the contract, or ▪ it will be calculated where there are payments 12 months or more before or after the rights date (the date on which the first right in the property is transferred or the services are provided). In the second situation, interest is calculated on a future or discounted value basis. Progress payments and deposits up to 10% of the total price are not payments included in the second situation.  The spreading and valuation rules allow a one-time-only election to include the effects of prescribed hedging rules for foreign exchange amounts included in foreign currency ASAPs. In substance, this is designed to replicate the tenor of the equivalent IFRS rules. Relatively, few foreign currency ASAPs for non-IFRS taxpayers are expected to have interest income or expenditure to spread under these rules. The reasons for that are the exclusion of 10% deposits and progress payments, and other payments that are less than 12 months before or after the rights date. For a detailed discussion of these rules, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014, at 77–85. Law: IT07 ss EW 32–EW 34, EZ 75, EZ 76, YA 1  ¶6-410 Debt parking and FA rules The following is an example of debt parking:  Such an arrangement was previously adopted to avoid remission income arising for a debtor. However, the legislation was amended to overcome this result.  Where a creditor sells a debt to an associate of a debtor at a discount of 20% or more of the consideration remaining payable under the debt, the debt is treated as forgiven by the creditor. Both the original creditor and debtor must carry out a base price adjustment, and a new financial arrangement is created between the debtor and the debtor’s associate. For the purpose of the base price adjustment, the debtor is treated as having paid the creditor the discounted amount that the associate pays the creditor to purchase the debt (in the example, $60). The debtor’s associate is treated as providing an interest-free loan to the debtor for the amount of the debt purchased by the associate ($60), so there is no income or expenditure to spread under the new financial arrangement. Under the new financial arrangement, if the debtor repays an amount in excess of the amount the debtor’s associate paid the original creditor, the excess will be a deduction to the debtor and income to the debtor’s associate. Law: IT07 ss EW 43, EW 49  ¶6-420 Release of debt out of natural love and affection under FA rules A debtor may be treated as having paid a debt that has been released in consideration of natural love and affection. This treatment applies when the creditor who releases the debt is a natural person and one of the following applies: ▪ the creditor forgives the debt because of the natural love and affection that the creditor has for the debtor, or ▪ the debtor is a trust established mainly to benefit: □ a natural person for whom the creditor has natural love and affection, or □ an organisation or trust entitled to the benefit of the income tax exemption for the income of a charity.  The means of forgiveness of the debt is immaterial. The forgiveness may occur through a will or it may occur through a deed of release (see further at ¶6-358). When drafted, both documents should state that the debt released is in consideration of natural love and affection. It is also confirmed that the release of debt can relate to an amount that is accrued and unpaid at the time of the forgiveness. The topic of the forgiveness of debt in a family context had been addressed in a public binding ruling. The binding ruling (BR Pub 99/7) commented that the phrase “natural love and affection” is used to describe an action by a person where the motive is induced not by a promise of something in return, but by the natural love and affection that the person has for another. An action undertaken in consideration of natural love and affection does not entice reciprocation, so that there is nothing in turn expected from the debtor. Natural love and affection is generally considered to subsist between relatives, such as father and child, brother and sister, husband and wife (or non-spousal domestic partners), uncle and nephew, grandmother and grandchild, great-grandfather and greatgrandchild and other descendants or antecedents of the creditor, whether by blood, marriage, non-spousal domestic relationship, or adoption; and whether or not born during the creditor’s lifetime. The Commissioner’s discussion of the ruling confirmed that the natural love and affection concept could apply when the debtor: ▪ is a relative such as a father, child, brother, sister, husband, wife, grandchild or close friend ▪ is the trustee of a fixed family trust for relatives, a close friend, another like trust or a superannuation scheme, or ▪ is the trustee of a discretionary family trust in which all the beneficiaries are relatives, a close friend, another like trust or a superannuation scheme. The Commissioner added that, in some cases, it would be possible for natural love and affection to be present outside the family. For example, it could be present between close friends (although not ordinary acquaintances or colleagues). Factors taken into account in  establishing whether there is natural love and affection include: express statements made, past distributions, existing relationships, and future intentions. The Commissioner’s final comment was that it was not accepted that a debt can be treated as having been repaid when the debtor is a family company. A company has a legal personality separate from its shareholders and so any relationship between the creditor and the company’s shareholders is irrelevant. See BR Pub 99/7, “Debt forgiveness in consideration of natural love and affection”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 9, October 1999 at 34. The trustee is required to keep a record of releases of debt and distributions to beneficiaries over the life of the trust. See s 22B of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Trustee income Trustee income may be treated as having been derived where a debt owed by the trustee has been forgiven and a distribution is made to a beneficiary who is neither a natural person for whom the creditor has natural love and affection nor a charity. This is where the creditor is a natural person and the trust was established mainly to benefit natural persons for whom the creditor has natural love and affection, or a charity. The trustee income is derived in the income year in which the distribution is made. There is one exclusion. It is recognised that a distribution may be made to another trust with beneficiaries who are persons for whom the creditor has natural love and affection, or a charity. The distribution to a similar family trust does not result in trustee income. This exclusion envisages a resettlement of trust assets on a similar family trust. Resettlements are commonly undertaken to isolate a parcel of trust assets to be held in trust for the benefit of a particular beneficiary. There may be a limit to the amount of trustee income. The trustee income cannot exceed the total amount of the debt that the creditor has forgiven. If debt has been forgiven on a number of occasions, this may require a balance to be kept of total debt forgiven less distributions that have given rise to trustee income. See s EW 50.  Law: IT07 ss EW 44, EW 50; TAA s 22B  ¶6-430 Release of debt by statute under FA rules A debtor is treated as having paid a debt where the debt is released pursuant to: ▪ s 304 of the Insolvency Act 2006 ▪ any of the Inland Revenue Acts ▪ the remission of a social assistance suspensory loan, or ▪ the terms of a loan under the small business cashflow scheme under s 7AA of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Under s 304 of the Insolvency Act 2006 a discharge from bankruptcy releases debts owed, except those obtained by fraud and for child support. Treatment of payment of the debt released will have the effect of preventing income arising upon calculation of the base price adjustment. Law: IT07 s EW 45  ¶6-440 Security payments and FA rules It is recognised that a guarantor may suffer a loss upon being required to honour the guarantee and that a payment designated as a “security payment” may subsequently be received from the principal debtor (the party for whose benefit the guarantee was given and whose default required honour of the guarantee). The security payment received is treated as income under the financial arrangements rules. In addition, a deduction is allowed for the amount of the security payment. This ensures that a neutral position is maintained. It would otherwise be anomalous if a guarantor who had suffered loss was simply attributed with income for the security payment received. Law: IT07 ss DB 14, EW 51  ¶6-450 Amalgamations and FA rules Different rules apply to the transfer of financial arrangements on an amalgamation depending on matters such as whether the amalgamation is a resident’s restricted amalgamation, whether the borrower is solvent or insolvent, and whether the financial arrangement is between amalgamating companies or with a third party. See ¶20-109–¶20-111.  ¶6-460 Consolidated groups and FA rules In general, no tax is payable on intra-group transfers of assets in a consolidated group. Income derived from intra-group transactions is excluded from the determination of a consolidated group’s income, and expenditure or losses incurred through transactions with other consolidated group companies are not deductible. These rules reflect the intention of the regime to treat intra-group transactions as transactions between branches of the same company so that there are no taxation consequences. This is the case until either that asset is disposed of outside the consolidated group, or the recipient company leaves the group still holding the asset, or the group deconsolidates. Special rules apply to financial arrangements. Transfer of financial arrangements intra-group Under ss FM 18–FM 20 financial arrangements must be transferred by one of three valuation methods: ▪ book value (where no base price adjustment will be required on transfer) — see s FM 18 ▪ an amount that fairly allocates the year’s income between the parties — see s FM 19, or ▪ market value — see s FM 20. Under s FM 18, no base price adjustment is required to allocate income or expenditure between the transferor and the transferee for the year of transfer if:  ▪ the financial arrangement rules apply to the financial arrangement ▪ the transferor and the transferee are members of the same consolidated group at all times in the income year of transfer ▪ both parties use the same method of calculating income and expenditure (for instance, both use the yield to maturity method) and the consolidated group’s return of income is made on that basis, and ▪ neither party is entitled to carry forward pre-consolidation losses, unless the group’s assessable income is sufficient to absorb all such losses. The transferor is treated as if it had never been a party to the financial arrangement. The transferee is treated as if it had entered into the financial arrangement in the same manner as the transferor, including incurring expenditure and deriving income and providing a return of income in relation to the financial arrangement. Inland Revenue has stated that these conditions are designed to prevent income being allocated so as to give undue tax advantage. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 5, December 1992, at 8. Where the group does not meet these conditions but there is no change in the method of calculation, the allocation of income or expenditure for the year of transfer must be fair and reasonable. See s FM 19. Where there is a change in the calculation method, the transferor is deemed to have transferred the financial arrangement at market value. See s FM 20. Income from financial arrangements Section FM 8 provides that an amount is excluded income under s CX 60 if it is derived by a consolidated group company from a transaction or other arrangement with another group member and would not be income were the two companies one company.  However, there are exceptions to this rule that apply to the extent that the amount arises under the base price adjustment mechanism from: ▪ the disposition of a financial arrangement that is subject to the financial arrangement rules, or ▪ the remission of a financial arrangement subject to the financial arrangement rules if the parties to that arrangement were not members of the consolidated group for the whole term of the arrangement. The latter requirement may prevent manipulative practices seeking use of the consolidation regime to prevent financial arrangement income arising for intra-group debt unable to be repaid in full. Law: IT07 ss CX 60, FM 8, FM 18–FM 20  ¶6-470 Capitalisation of debt, debt remission and FA rules Background to capitalisation of debt and debt remission issue A company in financial difficulty that owes a debt to a shareholder may issue shares to the shareholder and treat the issue of the shares as repayment in full of the debt. In some situations, practices of this kind raised the question of whether the company had provided sufficient consideration or whether there would be financial arrangement income under the base price adjustment. One view of the matter is that the issue of the shares cannot be regarded as full consideration paid by the company to repay the debt. The adverse financial position of the company prevents it from being regarded as able to repay its debts in full.  The alternative view is that the debt is treated as repaid in full despite doubts about the value of the company’s repayment. See, for example, Pro-Image Studios v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (1991) 4 ACSR 586 and Re Keith Bray Pty Ltd (1991) 5 ACSR 450. In February 2015, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 15/01, “Income tax: tax avoidance and debt capitalisation” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 3, April 2015 at 25), which concluded that the anti-avoidance provision, s BG 1, would potentially apply to a scenario involving debt capitalisation. The Commissioner’s conclusion was that s BG 1 would potentially apply to such a situation. There would therefore be remission income for the company. In direct response to the release of QB 15/01, the government released an officials’ issues paper, “Related parties debt remission”, which proposed retrospective changes to mitigate this result. The then current rules could result in an asymmetric tax treatment because the borrower was obliged to pay tax on the debt remission income while the lender, as an associated person, was unable to claim a deduction for the bad debt. The legislative changes were enacted to deal with the issues, and the Commissioner also later withdrew QB 15/01. Legislative response to issue Section EW 46C provides that when there is a debt remission within an economic group, the debt is treated as having been repaid in full in certain circumstances. The section applies to the extent to which a debt is forgiven and: ▪ the creditor is a member of the same wholly-owned group of companies as the debtor and □ the debtor is a New Zealand resident company, or □ a group of New Zealand resident companies hold all the common voting interests (or market value interests if relevant) in the debtor, ignoring the look-through rule for corporate shareholders in s YC 4  ▪ if the debtor is a company, the creditor is not a member of the same wholly-owned group of companies as the debtor and the creditor has ownership interests or, as applicable, market value interests in the debtor ▪ if the debtor is a partnership, the creditor has a partner’s interest in the income of the debtor ▪ if the debtor is a look-through company, the creditor has an effective look-through interest in the debtor. Where the first bullet point above applies, the debtor is treated as having paid the amount of debt, and the creditor as having been paid it, on the date the creditor forgives it. However, for the last three bullet points above, the debtor is treated as having paid the amount of the debt, and the creditor as having been paid it, on the date the creditor forgives it, to the extent to which the proportional debt ratio for the amount equals the proportional ownership ratio (ie the debt must be remitted pro rata to ownership). Note that when determining the proportional ownership ratio, nominal shares (being shares held by the trustee of a share purchase scheme, or employees or former employees of the debtor, that represent voting interests totalling not more than 3%) are ignored. The section does not apply if the creditor and debtor are members of the same wholly-owned group of companies and the creditor is a non-resident and the debt has been held by a person that is not a member of the wholly-owned group of companies. This is to prevent “debt parking” when the creditor is not in the New Zealand tax base (see ¶6-410 for a discussion of debt parking). For the purposes of the section, the means by which an amount of debt is forgiven is immaterial. In addition, a group of natural persons (described as the “single creditor group”) who are creditors or have interests in the debtor are treated as one creditor holding the total debts and interests of the group, if each person has natural love and affection for the others. Note that a trust may join the single creditor group in certain limited circumstances. A group of non-natural persons (described as the “single corporate creditor group”) that are  creditors or have interests in the debtor are also treated as one creditor if each person is a member of the same wholly-owned group of companies and the debtor is not. When the debt remission is inside a wholly-owned group, the remission does not cause a dividend to have been paid, with the removal of associated imputation considerations. However, the remission of debt owed by a foreign shareholder in a New Zealand creditor company continues to be taxed as a dividend. Debt remission is deemed to cause “available subscribed capital” for a corporate debtor (so that it can later be returned tax free to the shareholders if appropriate). The owner or creditor receives an uplift in their carrying cost of their shareholding in the debtor. If a debt remission does not result in available subscribed capital, it also does not result in the debtor receiving a capital profit, as this could lead to the artificial conversion of retained earnings into capital gains. These changes apply retrospectively from the commencement of the 2006–07 tax year, except where a taxpayer has previously taken an inconsistent tax position in a tax return. Accrued and unpaid interest is also deemed to be paid and received from 1 July 2017. Section DB 31(2)(bb) denies a deduction for a bad debt for financial arrangement income if the debtor is associated with the creditor, except when the debtor has no deductions for the financial arrangement, ie is not in the New Zealand tax base. This is to prevent the double deduction of the debtor’s financial arrangement (interest) deduction and the creditor’s bad debt deduction. The creditor has financial arrangement (interest) income. Example 1: Forgiveness in proportion to ownership Mike and Alex own 50% of the shares each in MA Limited. The company owned rental properties that have now all been sold. The company owes Mike and Alex $50,000 each. The shareholders wish to liquidate the company and forgive the debts owing to them. If Mike and Alex forgive the debt owing to them by MA Limited, will any remission income arise to the company? The amounts forgiven will not give rise to any remission income for MA Limited if:  ▪ the creditor (ie Mike and Alex) holds an ownership interest in the debtor, and ▪ the debt is remitted pro rata to ownership (the proportional debt ratio for the amount must equal the proportional ownership ratio). The first requirement above is met because both creditors hold an ownership interest (shares) in the debtor (MA Limited). The proportional debt ratio is the creditor’s percentage of the total debt that is forgiven. In this case the proportional debt ratio for Mike and Alex is 50% ($50,000 owed by each shareholder/$100,000 total debt). The proportional ownership ratio is the creditor’s percentage of total ownership interests. In this case, the proportional ownership for Mike and Alex is 50% because they each own 50% of the total shares in MA Limited. Because the proportional debt ratio (50%) for each of the shareholders equals the proportional ownership ratio (50%), the forgiveness of the debt by Mike and Alex will not give rise to taxable income for MA Limited. When the debts are forgiven, a base price adjustment must be performed. The outstanding debt is treated as being paid by MA Limited to Mike and Alex under the base price adjustment which means no income arises. Note that prior to the law change, remission income of $100,000 would have arisen for MA Limited. Although the relevant law was passed in 2017, it generally applies from the 2006–07 income year.  Example 2: Forgiveness not in proportion to ownership Trish and Bernie are colleagues who each own 50% of Star Holdings Limited. The company owes Trish $10,000 and Bernie $50,000. Assume that there is no natural love and affection between Trish and Bernie. 1. Will taxable income arise if Trish and Bernie forgive all their debts to Star Holdings Limited? Yes, taxable income of $60,000 will arise for Star Holdings Limited if Trish and Bernie forgive all their debts. This is because the debt forgiveness will not be in proportion to ownership (ie the debt forgiveness is not pari passu). The proportional debt and ownership ratios for Trish and Bernie are set out as follows: Proportional debt ratio  Proportional ownership ratio  Trish  ($10,000/$60,000) = 16.67% 50/100 = 50%  Bernie  ($50,000/$60,000) = 83.33% 50/100 = 50%  Because the proportional debt ratio does not equal the proportional ownership ratio for either Trish or Bernie taxable income will arise if the shareholders forgive all their debt. 2. Can any amount of the debts be forgiven without any taxable income arising?  If both Trish and Bernie each forgive $10,000 no taxable income will arise for Star Holdings Limited. However, there will still be outstanding debt of $40,000 remaining. Where $10,000 is forgiven by each shareholder, the proportional debt ratio will equal the proportional ownership ratio as follows: Proportional debt ratio  Proportional ownership ratio  Trish  ($10,000/$20,000) = 50%  50/100 = 50%  Bernie  ($10,000/$20,000) = 50%  50/100 = 50%  If the remaining $40,000 is forgiven taxable income of $40,000 will arise for Star Holdings Limited.  QB 20/02 – debt remission income for look-through company In June 2020, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 20/02, “Income tax — Natural love and affection exception to debt remission income for look-through company” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 136). The item confirms a look-through company (LTC) will not derive debt remission income when a close friend or family member of the shareholders forgives a loan made to the LTC if all the shareholders and close friend or family member have natural love and affection for each other. The Commissioner will generally accept that the shareholders and the close family friend or family member have natural love and affection for each other. It is also noted in QB 20/02 that, while the item does not consider the partnership exception in s EW 46C(1)(d), the conclusions reached are also relevant to partnerships where the creditor of the partnership and all the partners have natural love and affection for each other. Note that the conclusion reached in QB 20/02 is subject to the provision that no other debt of the LTC (or partnership) to which s EW 46C applies is forgiven at the same time. Debt guarantees within economic group With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, s EW 49B provides a rule for debt guarantees within the economic group, modelled on the debt parking rules in s EW 49 (see ¶6-410). The section applies when a guarantor pays an amount  under a guarantee (the guarantee payment) for an associated debtor to the debtor’s creditor. For the debtor, the amount of the guarantee payment is treated as consideration paid or payable by the debtor for the debt, thus the guaranteed loan is deemed to be repaid to the extent of the guarantee payment. For the guarantor, the guarantee payment is treated as not being consideration paid or payable by the guarantor and the guarantor is denied a tax deduction. If the guarantor has recourse to the debtor for the guarantee payment, the guarantor is treated as providing the debtor with a new interest-free loan for the amount of the guarantee payment. If the debtor liquidates, the base price adjustment will be triggered on the deemed loan. When the rule in s EW 46C applies, the deemed loan will be treated by both the guarantor and the debtor as being repaid to the extent that the liquidation causes a shortfall and the debtor will not have any BPA income on this. Alternatively, if the debtor eventually repays the guarantor more than the guarantee payment, the excess is income of the guarantor and an allowable deduction to the debtor. Law: IT07 ss CD 5(2), CD 43(6B)–(6D), CD 44(8B), DB 31(2)(bb), DV 18B, EW 46C, EW 49B  AVOIDANCE PROVISIONS ¶6-550 Discretionary payments under a financial arrangement A party to a financial arrangement may be required to recalculate assessable income or expenditure in respect of the financial arrangement in circumstances in which: ▪ the terms of the financial arrangement confer on any of the parties, or an associated person of them, the discretion to decide on amounts payable under the arrangement ▪ terms of that kind are not generally accepted commercial practice ▪ the change in the amounts payable under the financial arrangement upon exercise of that discretion does not reflect  changes in economic, commodity, industrial or financial indices or banking or commercial rates, and ▪ the effect of the arrangement is to defeat the intention of the financial arrangements rules. In these circumstances, the person must use an arm’s length consideration to calculate the true income and expenditure under the financial arrangement by application of the yield to maturity method. The income or expenditure calculated is substituted for any amounts previously calculated in respect of the financial arrangement. The timing of the adjustment depends on when the taxpayer ceases to be a party to the financial arrangement under consideration. When this in fact occurs, an adjustment is made for the income year in which that change takes place. A person who retains the status of a party to the financial arrangement is subject to the adjustment at intervals of not less than five complete income years after the year in which the person issued or acquired the financial arrangement. The Commissioner is authorised to reassess accordingly despite the time bar that might otherwise have applied. The adjustment must be made in a special tax return. No new due date is set for the purpose of use of money interest. The adjustment is in addition to the base price adjustment. Law: IT07 s EW 53; TAA s 44B  ¶6-560 Defeating the intention of the FA rules The Commissioner is authorised to substitute an arm’s length consideration for that used by the parties to a financial arrangement if he is satisfied that the financial arrangement is entered into, acquired, varied, sold or transferred in a way that defeats the intention of the financial arrangements rules. The grounds upon which this may be done are broad, the Commissioner needing only to have regard to the connection between the parties and any other relevant circumstances.  In one case, the Commissioner alleged that gifts of government stock to a charity had the effect of defeating the intention of the financial arrangements rules. Under the financial arrangements rules as they then stood, the calculation of the base price adjustment conferred a deduction in the hands of the donor for the cost of the stock that was gifted. The Commissioner’s allegation of a dealing to defeat the intention of the financial arrangements rules was based on a suggestion that the rules assumed that all transfers of a financial arrangement would be at market value. The Privy Council considered that this argument resulted in putting the avoidance provisions to a very unusual use. Those provisions contemplate that the circumstances that justify application of the avoidance provisions will be specific to a particular transaction, arising out of the relationship between the parties and other relevant circumstances. In this respect, the financial arrangement avoidance provisions are similar to the general anti-avoidance provisions. What the two sections have in common is that, generally speaking, they are aimed at transactions that in commercial terms fall within the charge to tax but which have been, intentionally or otherwise, structured in such a way that, on a purely juristic analysis, they do not. That is what is meant by defeating the intention and application of the statute. In the present case, there was no tension between the commercial and juristic character of the transaction. It was in legal, commercial or any other terms, a transfer of financial arrangements for no consideration. The Commissioner relied on the avoidance provisions to overcome a deduction that the financial arrangements rules would otherwise confer. The Commissioner’s approach amounted to the imposition of tax by administrative discretion instead of by law. See C of IR v Auckland Harbour Board (2001) 20 NZTC 17,008 (PC). Note that one outcome of this case was legislative amendments providing that a financial arrangement transferred for nil or inadequate consideration is deemed to have been transferred at market value (see ¶6-370). Law: IT07 ss EW 48, GB 21, GC 6–GC 14  DETERMINATIONS ¶6-600 Issue of determinations under the FA rules The Commissioner has specific powers to issue determinations as to the application of income and expenditure from financial arrangements. Determinations issued are legally binding on the Commissioner and on the persons who are subject to them. The determinations may provide a general method by which a financial arrangement’s income or expenditure may be calculated. Alternatively, a determination may provide a specific method of calculating income or expenditure for a particular type of financial arrangement. A determination can differentiate classes of financial arrangements, having regard to the purpose for which they were originally acquired or issued, even though they may be of the same type. The Commissioner can also determine a number of other matters including the classes of persons who may apply the various determinations. In addition, the Commissioner may determine whether particular persons can use any of the spreading methods for the same class of financial arrangement. Determinations made under earlier tax Acts continue in force despite the repeal and replacement of tax Acts. Determinations issued The Commissioner has issued the following general determinations: ▪ Determination G1A: “Apportionment of income and expenditure on a daily basis” ▪ Determination G2: “Requirements as to precision” ▪ Determination G3: “Yield to maturity method” ▪ Determination G4: “Unit trusts with repurchase obligations” ▪ Determination G5C: “Mandatory conversion convertible notes”  ▪ Determination G6D: “Foreign currency rates” ▪ Determination G7C: “Futures and options markets” ▪ Determination G9A: “Financial arrangements that are denominated in a currency other than New Zealand dollars” ▪ Determination G9C: “Financial arrangements that are denominated in a currency other than New Zealand dollars: an expected value approach” ▪ Determination G10B: “Present value calculation methods” (applies to perpetuities) ▪ Determination G11A: “Present value based yield to maturity method” (applies to perpetuities) ▪ Determination G12: “Accounting for a financial arrangement in the absence of a determination” ▪ Determination G13A: “Prices or yields” ▪ Determination G14: “Forward contracts for foreign exchange and commodities” ▪ Determination G14B: “Forward contracts for foreign exchange and commodities: an expected value approach” ▪ Determination G15: “Exemption from s 64C for small debtors” ▪ Determination G16A: “Discounted value of amounts payable in relation to trade credits denominated in New Zealand currency” ▪ Determination G17B: “Deferred property settlements denominated in New Zealand currency” ▪ Determination G19: “Exchange traded option contracts”  ▪ Determination G20: “Discounted value of amounts payable in relation to trade credits denominated in a foreign currency” ▪ Determination G21: “Discounted value of amounts payable in relation to deferred property settlements denominated in a foreign currency” ▪ Determination G21A: “Agreements for sale and purchase of property denominated in foreign currency: discounted value of amounts payable” ▪ Determination G22: “Optional conversion convertible notes denominated in New Zealand dollars convertible at the option of the holder” ▪ Determination G22A: “Optional convertible notes denominated in New Zealand dollars” ▪ Determination G23: “Specified rate” ▪ Determination G24: “Straight line method” ▪ Determination G25: “Variations in the terms of a financial arrangement” ▪ Determination G26: “Variable rate financial arrangements” ▪ Determination G27: “Swaps” ▪ Determination G29: “Agreements for sale and purchase of property denominated in foreign currency: exchange rate to determine the acquisition price and method for spreading income and expenditure” ▪ Determination G31: “NZX Milk Price Futures Contracts: an expected value approach”. The Commissioner has also issued a number of specific determinations.  Law: IT07 s ZA 5; TAA ss 90AA, 90AC  ¶6-610 Application for a determination A taxpayer may seek a determination from the Commissioner under the Income Tax (Determinations) Regulations 1987. The fees for determinations are as follows: ▪ application fee (non-refundable): $322.00 (GST inclusive), and ▪ processing fee (per hour or part thereof, exclusive of the first two hours): $161.00 (GST inclusive). Applications should be made on form IR 735 (May 2019) and emailed to rulings@ird.govt.nz. The Commissioner does have the power to waive the fees, in full or in part, in exceptional cases. Once made, the following determinations are binding on the person or class of person affected by it: ▪ how the yield to maturity method applies to a financial arrangement ▪ the method for calculating financial arrangement income or expenditure under the determination or alternative method ▪ the method for determining the portion of certain items treated as solely attributable to an excepted financial arrangement that is part of a financial arrangement ▪ the method of determining the future value or the discounted value when ascertaining the consideration amount under s EW 32(5) or (6), and ▪ the method to be applied when calculating the consideration amount in a base price adjustment when a financial arrangement is disposed of within a consolidated group.  Determinations are required to be published in a publication chosen by the Commissioner within 30 days after they are made, although the Commissioner must only publish the anonymous version of the determination where an applicant has given an anonymity notification. Law: TAA ss 90AB, 90AC(3), 90AD(1)  ¶6-620 Challenge to a determination A person affected by a determination may challenge the determination in accordance with the disputes resolution procedures. A determination of this nature is treated as a disputable decision similar to an ordinary assessment or amended assessment. See ¶4215–¶4-220. Once made and applied, a determination forms the basis of an assessment of the person’s financial arrangement income and expenditure. Limited exceptions exist for a person detrimentally affected by subsequent legislation, or if the application for a determination contained a material misrepresentation or omission.  ¶6-630 Fresh determination Once a determination has been made, the Commissioner may vary or rescind it, in whole or in part, by issuing a fresh determination. The later determination must also be published within 30 days after it has been made. Clearly, a fresh determination could have a disruptive effect on a person who has treated a financial arrangement in accordance with previous arrangements. There is a period of grace for any financial arrangement acquired or issued before the fresh determination was notified or published. This class of arrangement is not subject to the later determination until four years after the determination is published or the person is notified of it. A person has the same rights of challenge to a fresh determination as arise on the making of the original determination. Law: TAA ss 90AC(6), 90AD, 90AE  ¶6-640 Determinations and binding rulings The general principles are that a determination is binding on the person affected by it, but a binding ruling is not. The binding ruling is only binding on the Commissioner. A determination is considered “law”, but a binding ruling represents only an interpretation of the law. There may be situations where a person applies for both a determination and a binding ruling. For example, there may be a need to determine the spread of income and expenditure and for an interpretation in relation to the deductibility of expenditure under a financial arrangement. The person may dispute a determination but not a binding ruling. The Commissioner is able to issue a binding ruling that provides an alternative means for both parties to a financial arrangement to clarify the application of the financial arrangements rules. However, this option is not available where the arrangement is already, or is potentially, subject to a determination. The Commissioner has issued few binding rulings that deal with topics under the financial arrangements rules. Examples include the release of debt for natural love and affection and deductions for bad debts. With effect from 18 March 2019, s 91CC of the Tax Administration Act 1994 allows the Commissioner to rule on certain financial arrangements rules questions for which she could previously only issue a determination. The Commissioner can make binding rulings on the following matters relating to financial arrangements: ▪ whether an amount is solely attributable to an excepted financial arrangement ▪ the use of certain spreading methods, and ▪ the value of certain property or services. Law: TAA ss 90AC(3), 91C, 91CC  FINANCE LEASES  ¶6-700 Finance leases and FA rules A finance lease is subject to the financial arrangements rules. The essence of a finance lease transaction is that substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the lessee and the lessor effectively recovers the cost of the asset plus interest from the rentals paid by the lessee. The provision of the lease asset to the lessee may be equated with an advance of principal and, through the lease payments, the lessee makes repayment of the “loan” at interest. The definitions of a “finance lease” and other relevant terms are contained in s YA 1. A lease of personal property (other than bloodstock or livestock) is a finance lease if, at the time the lease is entered into, any of the following criteria are met: ▪ ownership of the lease asset is transferred to the lessee or an associate of the lessee, during or at the end of the lease term ▪ the lessee or associate has the option to acquire the lease asset for an amount that is likely to be substantially lower than the market value of the lease asset on the date of acquisition ▪ an associate of the lessee has the right to acquire the lease asset or the lessor has the right to require an associate of the lessee to acquire the lease asset during the lease term under an arrangement that does not entitle the associate to receive all of the lease payments that may fall due after the asset is acquired ▪ the lease term is more than 75% of the estimated useful life of the lease asset, or ▪ the lease is entered into on or after 20 June 2007 and the lease is an arrangement (or part of an arrangement) involving the lease of an overseas asset where the income (other than the income of the lessor) from the use of the asset is not completely taxable in New Zealand and the lease is a finance lease under NZIAS 17 for the lessor, or the economic risks and rewards of  owning the asset have been transferred to someone other than the lessor. The finance lease rules extend to an arrangement involving the sale and leaseback of intangible assets. Taxpayers affected by COVID-19 On 30 June 2020, the Commissioner issued a variation to the definition of “finance lease” where a lease has been extended beyond 75% of the relevant asset’s estimated useful life due to circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic — see COV 20/08, “Variation in relation to the definition of ‘finance lease’ in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 26). A further variation, COV 20/12 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 11, December 2020 at 8), was issued on 5 November 2020 to extend the period during which a lease term could be extended. The variation prevents operating leases from being reclassified as finance leases where the lease term has been extended due to difficulties in transferring possession of the asset during the COVID-19 pandemic. Under the variation, the required lease term of “more than 75% of the asset’s estimated useful life” is extended to “more than 75% of the asset’s estimated useful life plus an additional 18 months” where the lease is extended between 14 February 2020 and 31 March 2021 (originally 30 November 2020 under COV 20/08). The variation is subject to the conditions that: ▪ The lease was entered into before 14 February 2020. ▪ The lease term was not more than 75% of the estimated useful life when the lease was entered into. ▪ The lease term is not extended more than 18 months beyond the end of its term as at 14 February 2020. ▪ The lease was extended because in the period between January 2020 and 31 March 2021, the lessee’s business has experienced a significant decline in actual (or predicted)  revenue that means the lessee had difficulty satisfying their existing lease agreement, and that decline in actual or predicted revenue is related to COVID-19. Note that the variation applies to leases that are extended between 14 February 2020 and 31 March 2021 and is not limited to leases where the lease term would otherwise have ended during that period. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes changes that will allow taxpayers who apply the New Zealand Equivalent to International Financial Reporting Standard 16 Leases (NZ IFRS 16) to more closely follow their accounting treatment of leases for tax purposes. The proposed rules will only apply to lessees, not lessors, and are intended to apply to taxpayers with IFRS reporting obligations for income years starting on or after 1 January 2019 to align with the commencement of NZ IFRS 16. It is intended that the proposed changes will update the definition of “finance lease” in s YA 1 to refer to NZ IFRS 16, although the Bill, as introduced, does not include this change. No changes are proposed to the existing boundary between finance leases and operating leases for tax purposes. Under ss FA 6 and FA 7, the leasing of a lease asset is treated as a sale of that asset to the lessee. This is deemed to occur on the date the lease starts. The lessor is deemed to have given the lessee a loan for the amount of the lessor’s disposition value for the lease asset (calculated under s EW 32) and the lessee is treated as receiving a loan to purchase the lease asset for the lessee’s acquisition cost of the lease asset (calculated under ss EW 32 and EW 33). Example 1: X acquires equipment for $3,000 and incurs expenditure of $500 carrying out work on the plant that will adapt it for the lessee’s purpose. The value of the plant (ie the lowest cash price) is $4,000. The lessor’s disposition cost will be $4,000. X will be deemed to have sold the asset for $4,000.  Depreciation No depreciation loss may be deducted by a lessor during the lease term or during the tax year in which the lease term commences. See s FA 8. Termination of a finance lease On the termination of a lease, if the lessee does not acquire ownership there is a deemed resale of the lease asset to the lessor at the guaranteed residual value or, if there is no guaranteed residual value, at nil value. If a lease terminates early and the lessor reacquires the lease asset, the lease asset is treated as being sold by the lessee to the lessor for the outstanding balance of the deemed loan less any amount paid by the lessee to be released from any obligation under the lease. See s FA 10. If the lessee retains the lease asset under the lease, any subsequent sale is subject to tax. The profit on sale is deemed by s FA 9(2) to be income of the lessee under s CC 11. If the lessor retains the asset, any subsequent sale by the lessor is effectively included in income. Lessor’s income under a finance lease The lessor’s income under a finance lease is treated as interest. This means that the interest component of the finance is subject to NRWT where the lessor is a non-resident. A finance lease is not an excepted financial arrangement. The interest that is income will be recognised under the financial arrangements rules by use of the yield to maturity or other spreading method. Lessee’s deduction under a finance lease A lessee is allowed a deduction for expenditure incurred under a finance lease provided the normal deductibility criteria are met. Therefore, the deductibility of a finance lease payment will be subject to the general limitations for deductibility such as the capital limitation. If a deduction is available, the financial arrangements rules will govern the timing of its recognition. Adjustment for consecutive or successive leases  The lessor and the lessee must make an adjustment pursuant to s FA 11 if there are consecutive or successive leases deemed to be the one lease. This is where they did not contemplate at the start of the lease term that the lease would be for more than 75% of the estimated useful life of the lease asset and the total lease term becomes a period longer than 75% of the lease asset’s estimated useful life. The ensuing adjustment must be part of the tax return for the income year in which the adjustment is made. An adjustment that produces a positive amount is income to the lessor or the lessee under s CH 6, as the case may be. Conversely, a negative amount is a deduction under s DB 51B. Adjustment required when a lease becomes a finance lease In the year a lease becomes a finance lease, an adjustment is required to account for any under- or over-returning of income or expenditure by the lessor and the lessee in previous years. This adjustment is designed to compare the amounts which would have been returned or claimed had the lease been a finance lease from the outset with the actual amounts already returned or claimed. The difference is income or expenditure in the tax year in which the lease changes to a finance lease. These provisions were amended with effect for leases entered into on or after 20 May 1999 and for income years including 20 June 2007 and later income years. The changes accommodate an adjustment for existing operating leases entered into before 20 June 2007 that are reclassified as finance leases under the amended rules (ie where overseas lease assets are involved). Under the rules, for the remaining term of the lease, a lessee’s allowable depreciation deductions are reduced by one-sixth of the depreciation deductions claimed while the lease was treated as an operating lease. The spreading methods for a finance lease If the lease has a fixed duration, with known payments, it would be appropriate to apply the yield to maturity or the straight-line method. See ¶6-400 regarding the determination of consideration under a finance lease for the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. At  the end of the term of the finance lease, a base price adjustment should be performed. Example 2: C enters into a finance lease with D for a term of four years. The lessee’s acquisition cost is $10,000. The lease payments over 4 years total $16,000. In years one to three inclusive, C has claimed interest deductions of $4,500. The lease asset has been depreciated for tax purposes and has a tax book value of $5,000 at the end of the four-year term. The lease asset is returned to D and there is a deemed disposal of nil (as there is no guaranteed residual value). C is entitled to claim a depreciation loss on disposal of the asset of $5,000. The base price adjustment is as follows: (10,000 − 16,000) − 0 + 4,500 + 0 = ($1,500) As the result is a negative amount, it is expenditure incurred by C. The total deductions claimed by C over the life of the lease would be: $ Interest  4,500  Depreciation  5,000  Loss on disposal  5,000  Base price adjustment  1,500  Total deductions  16,000  Law: IT07 ss CC 11, CC 12, CH 6, DB 51B, FA 6–FA 11B, YA 1  HIRE PURCHASE AGREEMENTS ¶6-740 Hire purchase agreements The provisions of ss FA 12–FA 18 are intended to have the outcome that a hire purchase agreement for personal property, being personal property that is not livestock or bloodstock, is treated for tax purposes as a sale of the property with a loan for the purchase price. That loan is treated as having been made by the person providing  the finance under the agreement to the person obtaining the right to use the property. A hire purchase agreement is: ▪ an agreement under which goods are let or hired with an option to purchase, however the payments are described, and ▪ an agreement for the purchase of goods by instalment payments (whether described as rent or hire or otherwise) under which the person who agrees to purchase the goods is given possession of them before the total amount payable has been paid. A hire purchase agreement also includes: ▪ an agreement to sell goods at retail under which the buyer grants security over the goods to the seller for the whole or part of the purchase price and the property in the goods passes to the buyer subject to that security, and ▪ a sale and loan arrangement under which a person lends money on the security of any goods that have been bought (or are to be bought) at retail if: □ the whole or part of the purchase price is paid out of the proceeds of the loan, and □ the loan is made by the seller, or □ the loan is arranged by the seller and made by a third party who is engaged in the business of lending money (or who habitually lends money in the course of the third party’s business). In the first case, the hire purchase agreement will be treated as being made at the time at which the sale of the goods is made. In the second case, the hire purchase agreement will be treated as being made at the time at which the loan is made. A hire purchase agreement does not include an agreement:  ▪ under which property in the goods passes absolutely to the person who agrees to purchase them at the time of the agreement or upon or at any time before delivery of the goods ▪ that is not made at retail, or ▪ to the extent that the property that is the subject of the agreement is livestock or bloodstock. A hire purchase agreement for livestock or bloodstock is an excepted financial arrangement. See ¶6-065. Income from the gross profit component The merchant granting the use of or the right to use a hire purchase asset is deemed to have sold the hire purchase asset to the customer at the commencement of the hire purchase agreement. Any gross profit element in the transaction is included as assessable income, under the general rules, in the year that the hire purchase agreement is entered into and is deemed to be interest. The gross profit element does not become assessable over the term of the agreement. Depreciation and consideration Depreciation deductions may only be claimed by the buyer. See s FA 14. The buyer is deemed to have purchased the asset for the consideration determined under the financial arrangements rules, plus any expenditure or loss incurred by the buyer in preparing and installing the hire purchase asset for use. That consideration generally will be the lowest price of the hire purchase asset, although possibilities apply if the agreement is part of a financial arrangement. See further at ¶6-400. Spreading method for interest The interest component of payments under the hire purchase agreement are to be recognised by the application of one of the available spreading methods. See further beginning at ¶6-102. Assignment  It is recognised that a merchant who enters into a hire purchase agreement may assign the agreement, typically to a financier. The assignment will be in one of two forms. One is where the merchant assigns all property in the agreement. The other is where only the right to the income stream is assigned. The former class of transaction is more common because of the greater security conferred on the financier. Where the merchant assigns all of the property in a hire purchase agreement, inclusive of title to the leased asset and the right to the lease payments, the following consequences apply: ▪ the original hire purchase agreement is deemed to be terminated for the purposes of calculating a base price adjustment ▪ the financier would calculate financial arrangements income under the agreement by referring to the price actually paid for the agreement, and ▪ the financier would be deemed to be the seller for the purposes of making the final calculations on the termination of the agreement. If the original seller retains legal ownership of the underlying asset, but assigns the income stream, the seller would be required to perform a base price adjustment for accrued income and expenditure. The customer would be unaffected by any assignment of the hire purchase agreement. Termination of the agreement A hire purchase agreement may be terminated in circumstances in which the buyer or an associate does not acquire the asset. In that event, the seller is deemed to acquire the asset at the buyer’s outstanding balance as at termination. The seller is to treat the asset as trading stock if it is a business asset of that party. This deemed acquisition of trading stock results in a deduction for the amount of the difference between the outstanding balance and the market value. This offsets the income of that amount that is deemed to be derived under the base price adjustment. Depending on the amount  of any sale proceeds or year-end stock valuation, the seller may be allowed a further deduction or have assessable income. Repossession and associated expenses and recoveries are deductible and assessable according to ordinary principles. Where a deduction for deemed acquisition of trading stock has been taken, there can be no bad debt deduction for amounts owing or to become owing under the agreement. Any payments that the buyer makes after the year of termination are income to the seller. Any payments that the seller makes after the year of termination are expenditure incurred (if not previously included in the seller’s outstanding balance) and income to the buyer (if not previously included in the buyer’s outstanding balance). Transfer of ownership to buyer A buyer may acquire ownership of a hire purchase asset at the end of the hire purchase period. If the seller was deemed to have sold the asset to the buyer at the start of the agreement, the transfer of ownership to the buyer at the termination or expiry of the hire purchase agreement will not constitute either a further disposition by the seller or further acquisition by the buyer. Withholding tax The income of a seller from a loan under a hire purchase agreement is treated as interest. This means that the payments could be subject to the deduction of RWT or NRWT as applicable. Law: IT07 ss CC 13, EW 32, EW 33, FA 12–FA 18, YA 1  LAND TRANSACTIONS Categories of land disposals subject to taxation ¶7-010 Tax statement required on transfer of land  ¶7-018  Residential land withholding tax  ¶7-020  Taxation of Disposals of Land  ¶7-025  Exclusions  ¶7-201  Tax Accounting  ¶7-360  Related Topics  ¶7-400  ¶7-010 Categories of land disposals subject to taxation Provision is made within subpart CB of the Income Tax Act 2007 for income to include receipts from the disposal of land in various circumstances. Broadly, there are nine categories of land disposals that give rise to income. Each category is subject to exclusions that, if applicable, operate to prevent the category-creating income. The categories of land disposals that give rise to income are the following: ▪ for residential land first acquired on or after 1 October 2015 and before 29 March 2018, acquired and disposed of within two years ▪ for residential land first acquired on or after 29 March 2018, acquired and disposed of within five years ▪ purpose or intention of sale ▪ a business relating to land that encompasses dealing, developing or erecting buildings ▪ dealer’s other land  ▪ developer’s other land ▪ builder’s other land ▪ development or division commenced within 10 years ▪ major development or division ▪ rezoning changes, and ▪ landfills. Exclusions These categories of income from the disposal of land are subject to the exclusions set out in ss CB 15C–CB 23. The effect of an exclusion is that an amount that is otherwise income under ss CB 6A–CB 15 ceases to be income under one of those provisions. This statutory approach leaves at large the position under other provisions of the Act. The exclusions encompass the following: ▪ main home exclusion for residential land disposed of within five years of acquisition (two years for land acquired before 29 March 2018) ▪ residential exclusion for taxpayer’s own residence ▪ a development or division of land for residential use ▪ rezoning gains if disposal is for residential purposes ▪ business premises ▪ development or division for the business ▪ development or division if disposal is for farming purposes ▪ farming purposes and rezoning gains ▪ development or division of investment land ▪ an exclusion for certain council-controlled organisations, and  ▪ an exclusion for Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) and companies in the same wholly-owned group. Interaction of land disposal provisions with other provisions The land disposal provisions apply if their requirements are satisfied. They are not subject to an implied limitation that would prevent their application to gains that may otherwise be regarded as of a capital nature. See Lowe v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,006 (CA). The land disposal provisions capture gains of a capital nature, as the category relating to rezoning changes illustrates. The interaction of the land disposal provisions with other provisions of the Act concerning assessable income may be unclear in some cases. There are no specific provisions that address the topic. A first proposition is that the land disposal provisions are not an exhaustive code for the taxation of the sale of land. There is no provision that prevents gains derived from the sale of land forming part of assessable income as amounts derived from a business, from a profit-making undertaking or scheme or as income under ordinary concepts. Example: A husband and wife and their family company purchased several residential houses with the intention of holding them as long-term investments for the couple’s retirement. Financial difficulties compelled the sale of 20 properties over a two-and-a-half-year period. The Commissioner assessed the profits from the sale of 17 of those properties over the 1990–1992 income years. The Commissioner submitted that gains from the sale of the properties were assessable income on any one of the following bases: ▪ business profits ▪ gains from an undertaking or scheme entered into for the purpose of making a profit, or ▪ income derived from any other source whatsoever. The Taxation Review Authority held that the profits were not assessable income. The sales were not part of any business of buying or selling properties but were to wind down the letting business. The Authority also held that there was no undertaking or scheme involving the purchase and resale of realty for profit. The Authority observed that unless profits from land dealings are clearly derived from land as circulating capital, the profits  will almost certainly be capital rather than revenue. See Case S86 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,538.  Significantly, in Case S86, the Authority did not take the approach of holding that the absence of the application of the land disposal provisions necessarily prevented the application of the more general provisions on assessable income. Despite the land disposal provisions not having application, it continued to be necessary to consider whether other provisions of the Act rendered the gains made assessable income. A second proposition is that it may be appropriate to regard the land disposal provisions as the only provisions of possible application in some situations. For example, the application of the exclusion for the business premises for a dealer or developer may be regarded as ending any enquiry as to whether the disposal results in assessable income. The application of some other provision to yield assessable income would undermine the exclusion. Similarly, the provisions on major subdivisions prescribe market value as the cost base for calculation of the assessable income. It would undermine the provisions on market value for it to become the case that assessable income should be calculated on the basis of historical cost under the provisions taxing business profits. For a more detailed commentary on land transactions, see R Thompson and M van den Berg A Practical Guide to Taxing Property Transactions (7th ed, CCH, Auckland, October 2019). Disposal of land at a loss The land disposal provisions do not address the deduction of a disposal of land at a loss. The land may be regarded as revenue account property because its disposal produces income. A deduction is allowed under s DB 23 (see ¶7-360) for the cost of revenue account property despite the capital limitation. Simultaneous recognition of the sale proceeds would effectively confer a deduction for the loss. That is also the position under the general law. See C of IR v Inglis (1992) 14 NZTC 9,180 (CA). Law: IT07 ss CB 6A–CB 23B, DB 23  ¶7-018 Tax statement required on transfer of land All transferors and transferees of real property must provide a tax statement as part of the conveyancing processes under the Land Transfer Act 2017. A tax statement must contain the following: ▪ full name, date and signature of the transferor or transferee ▪ whether the land has a home on it and, with effect from 1 January 2020, if so, whether it is a main home transfer (see below) for the transferor or transferee ▪ whether the person or a member of their immediate family is a New Zealand citizen or visa-holder ▪ if the person is a transferee and they or their immediate family has a work or student visa, whether they intend living on the land, and ▪ either: □ the category of exemption that applies (ie if the transfer is a non-notifiable transfer), or □ the person’s IRD number and, if the person is a tax resident in another jurisdiction at the time of the transfer, the name and country code of that jurisdiction and the equivalent of an IRD number (the “tax identification number” or TIN) from that foreign jurisdiction. Where a person is acting in another capacity (for example, as trustee of a trust), the tax statement provided must relate to the capacity in which they are acting. Nominees must provide details of the principal. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes changes to the Land Transfer Act 2017 to move the content of the land transfer tax statement (LTTS) to regulations. This change will make it easier to amend the LTTS in the future, eg to  make changes that would reduce compliance costs for property transfers. The proposed amendments are intended to apply from the date of enactment of the Bill. The current requirements in s 79 of the Land Transfer Act 2017 will apply until the first regulations that prescribe the content for the LTTS come into force. Non-notifiable transfers Non-notifiable transfers (where there is no requirement to provide IRD and TIN numbers) may be specified under regulations provided they meet certain criteria. The Land Transfer (Land Information and Offshore Persons Information) Exemption Regulations 2015 provide that the following transfers of an estate in land are non-notifiable transfers in relation to the transferor: ▪ a transfer by a public authority or a local authority ▪ a distribution by an executor, administrator or trustee of a deceased’s estate to a beneficiary ▪ a transfer of mortgaged land by the mortgagee ▪ a rating sale under the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, and ▪ a court-ordered transfer. In addition, transfers of land to public authorities and local authorities are also non-notifiable transfers for the authorities. The regulations also exempt transfers of Māori Land and transfers as part of the Treaty settlement process from the requirement to complete a tax statement. These exemptions are for practicality reasons. Main home exemption before 1 January 2020 Before 1 January 2020, the transfer by a New Zealand individual (who was not an “offshore person” as defined in the Tax Administration Act 1994) of their main home was also a non-notifiable transfer. However, with effect from 1 January 2020, amendments to the Land Transfer Act 2017 mean the transfer of a person’s main home is no longer a non-  notifiable transfer. As a result, individuals who buy or sell their main home are now required to provide their IRD number and information relevant for overseas tax purposes. Note, however, that a six-month transitional period is provided for in sch 1 of the Land Transfer Act. If an agreement to transfer land was entered into before 1 January 2020, the old rules will continue to apply if the instrument of transfer is lodged for registration on or before 1 July 2020. For the main home exemption to apply for a transferee, the land must have been intended to be used predominantly for a dwelling that would be the transferee’s main home. For the main home exemption to apply for a transferor, the land had to have been used predominantly, for most of the time the transferor owned the land, as a dwelling that was the transferor’s main home. The owner must have intended to reside, or have resided, in the property as their main home. Accordingly, the exemption did not apply when only a family member used, or had used, the property as their main home, and not the owner themselves. The test was applied at the date of transfer and applied for each transferor or transferee. Exemption excluded The exemption was not available where any one of the following applied: ▪ the person was an “offshore person” (see discussion below) ▪ the property was to be owned via a trust (in the case of a transferee) ▪ the property had been owned via a trust (in the case of a transferor), or ▪ the main home exemption had been used twice or more in the two years immediately preceding the date of transfer. Used as home for “most of the time” For the transferor, the land had to have been used for most of the time the person owned the land as their main home. Inland Revenue (IR)  has indicated this requires the property to have been used more than 50% of the time as their main home for the period the person owned the land. The land did not need to have been used without interruption as their main home. Mixed use properties Where a property was used as both a main home and for other commercial, investment, or farming purposes, the main home exemption was available where most of the land was used for the home. When less than 50% of the property was used for the main home of the person, then the main home exemption did not apply. Multiple homes Where a person resided in multiple homes, only one of those properties could be their main home. Their main home would be determined according to which property the person had the greatest connection with. The factors that determined these connections would include: ▪ the time the person occupied the dwelling ▪ where their immediate family, if any, lived ▪ where their social ties were strongest ▪ the person’s use of the dwelling ▪ the person’s employment, business interests and economic ties to the area where the dwelling was located, and ▪ whether the person’s personal property was in the dwelling. Main home transfer With effect from 1 January 2020, if transferred land has a home on it, the tax statement has to state whether the transfer is a “main home transfer” in relation to the transferor or transferee. A “main home transfer” is defined as: ▪ in relation to a transferor, a transfer of land that has a home on it if the transferor—  – is a natural person, is not acting in the capacity of the trustee of a trust, and has resided in the home for more than 50% of the period during which the transferor has been an owner of the land, or – is a trustee of a trust a beneficiary of which is a natural person who has resided in the home for more than 50% of the period during which the land has been the property of that trust. ▪ in relation to a transferee, a transfer of land that has a home on it if the transferee— – is a natural person, is not acting in the capacity of the trustee of a trust, and intends to reside in the home, or – is a trustee of a trust a beneficiary of which is a natural person who intends to reside in the home. For these purposes, a “home” is defined as a dwelling mainly used as a residence. Where a dwelling is used as both a residence and for other commercial, investment, or farming purposes, it will be necessary to determine if most of the dwelling is used as a residence. When less than 50% is used as a residence, the dwelling will not satisfy the definition of a “home”. A six-month transitional period is provided for in sch 1 of the Land Transfer Act. If an agreement to transfer land is entered into before 1 January 2020, the tax statement does not have to comply with the new requirements if the instrument of transfer is lodged for registration on or before 1 July 2020. Information disclosure and retention The information is collected by conveyancers from property vendors and purchasers, and provided to Land Information New Zealand, which in turn provides the information to IR. The onus is on vendors and purchasers to provide accurate information. Conveyancers do not need to certify the accuracy of the information, but they are required to provide it before certifying the property transfer. Offence to supply misleading or false tax information  A person who knowingly, or with intent to deceive, gives false or misleading tax information, commits an offence. They are liable to a fine not exceeding $25,000 for a first conviction and $50,000 for any subsequent convictions. If they provide information they genuinely believe to be true, but that is not in fact correct, they will not be committing an offence. Requirement for offshore person to hold a bank account before obtaining IRD number Section 55B provides that the Commissioner must not allocate an IRD number to an “offshore person” who requests one unless the Commissioner first receives a current bank account number for the offshore person or the Commissioner is satisfied the information available provides assurance as to the applicant’s identity and background. The bank account can be with a registered bank or a licensed non-bank deposit taker but must have gone through the appropriate anti-money laundering due diligence checks. The requirement applies only in instances where a person has applied for an IRD number. This is so that the current practice of the Commissioner allocating IRD numbers as an administrative matter in some cases will continue. Meaning of “offshore person” An “offshore person” is: ▪ for an individual: □ New Zealand citizen who is outside New Zealand and has not been in New Zealand within the last three years □ a person who holds a residence class visa granted under the Immigration Act 2009 and who is outside New Zealand and has not been in New Zealand within the last 12 months, or □ a person who is not a New Zealand citizen and who does not hold a residence class visa ▪ for a body corporate or an unincorporated body of persons, including a trust or unit trust, a person who would be an overseas person under s 7(2)(b) to (f) of the Overseas Investment Act 2005,  treating references to an overseas person or persons in that section as including a person or persons described above — in general, body corporates incorporated outside New Zealand or non-individuals that are 25% or more owned or controlled by offshore individuals. Becoming an offshore person Note that where a non-individual has an existing IRD number and current bank account number and they become an offshore person, they must provide their bank account number to the Commissioner immediately if they have not done so already. This does not apply to individuals, so that a New Zealand citizen who emigrates will not be obliged to provide a bank account number after being away for three years. Wider application than compliance in land dealings Although the provision was originally enacted as part of the property tax measures announced by the government in Budget 2015, it is wider than just tax compliance in land dealings. It is also intended to promote the enforcement of tax obligations of offshore persons generally and to give IR greater assurance about the identity of offshore persons. Exceptions to requirement to provide current bank account There are three exceptions to the requirement for an offshore person to provide a current bank account number or to satisfy the Commissioner as to their identity before being issued an IRD number. These exceptions apply to the following: ▪ a person who requires an IRD number only because they are a non-resident supplier of goods and services under the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 ▪ a person registered or applying to be registered under s 54B of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (see ¶32-148) ▪ a person for whom a reporting entity under the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009 has conducted the customer due diligence procedures required under that Act.  In addition, a non-resident seasonal worker under the recognised seasonal employer instructions is not required to provide the Commissioner with a current bank account number for the first month of a period of employment in New Zealand. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 55B; LT ss 77–86  ¶7-020 Residential land withholding tax The residential land withholding tax (RLWT) applies to the sale of “residential land” in New Zealand by an “offshore RLWT person” where the land was acquired on or after 1 October 2015 and owned for less than five years before being sold (two years for land acquired before 29 March 2018). This withholding tax ensures tax is paid under the brightline test (see ¶7-050) by providing a collection mechanism where the seller is an offshore person. The RLWT rules are set out in subpart RL. Details of the rules are set out below. All examples are taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 30–56. Requirements for RLWT to apply Under s RL 1, for RLWT to apply to a particular disposal, there must be: ▪ a disposal of residential land located in New Zealand, and ▪ the residential land purchase amount would be income of the vendor under the bright-line test, ignoring the application of the other land taxing provisions in ss CB 6–CB 12 and the “main home” exclusion, and ▪ the vendor must be an offshore RLWT person. Note that vendors who are co-owners are treated as disposing of separate residential land on the basis of an appropriate split of the underlying residential land and the consideration for its disposal. RLWT does not apply when the vendor holds an RLWT certificate of exemption that applies for the disposal of the relevant residential land. See discussion below.  RLWT does not apply to the transfer of residential land as relationship property. Any subsequent disposal of the land may be caught by the RLWT rules. Residential land in New Zealand RLWT only applies to residential land located in New Zealand. The meaning of “residential land” is the same as for the bright-line test and is discussed at ¶7-050. Residential land purchase amount The “residential land purchase amount” is defined as an amount paid or payable for the disposal of residential land located in New Zealand, but excludes deposits and part-payments as long as all deposits and partpayments total in aggregate less than 50% of the purchase price for the land. This rolling aggregate is to ensure that part-payments are not used to circumvent the application of the RLWT. Example 1: Elizabeth is an offshore RLWT person. Elizabeth agrees to sell her house to Rebecca for $500,000. The contract requires Rebecca to pay a 10% deposit of $50,000, with the remaining $450,000 to be paid upon settlement. The $50,000 deposit is not a residential land purchase amount, but the $450,000 paid upon settlement is a residential land purchase amount. RLWT is calculated based on the purchase amount of $500,000.  Bright-line income The next requirement is that the residential land purchase amount would be income for the vendor under the bright-line test, ignoring the application of the other land taxing provisions in ss CB 6–CB 12 and the “main home” exclusion. The bright-line test does not generally apply when one of the other land taxing provisions in ss CB 6–CB 12 applies. However, RLWT does apply when a vendor disposes of the residential land within the fiveyear bright-line period (two-year bright-line period for land acquired before 29 March 2018), regardless of whether another land taxing provision applies. This ensures difficulties of collection of tax from foreign investors are somewhat alleviated. In addition, because it is unlikely that the property being sold in New Zealand by an offshore  RLWT person would be that person’s main home, the main home exclusion is not available for the purposes of the RLWT. Note that this reference to “income” under the bright-line test means there does not need to be a land title transfer for an RLWT obligation to arise; there only needs to be a residential land purchase amount. This means that off-the-plan sales, for example, are subject to RLWT if the other conditions are also met. The bright-line test is discussed in detail at ¶7-050. In essence, the test generally applies where the vendor acquired the property on or after 1 October 2015 and has owned the property for less than five years (two years if acquired before 29 March 2018) before disposing of it. Although the main home exclusion does not apply for RLWT, there is an exemption or rollover relief from RLWT for inherited property and for transfers of relationship property, as provided under the bright-line test. Offshore RLWT persons The vendor must be an “offshore RLWT person” for RLWT to apply. “Offshore RLWT person” is defined in s YA 1 and covers both individuals and non-individuals, such as companies or trusts. An individual is an “offshore RLWT person” if they are: ▪ a New Zealand citizen who is outside New Zealand and has not been in New Zealand within the last three years ▪ the holder of a New Zealand residence class visa granted under the Immigration Act 2009 and is outside New Zealand and has not been in New Zealand within the last 12 months, or ▪ not a New Zealand citizen and does not hold a New Zealand residence class visa granted under the Immigration Act. Example 2: Mary is an investor in residential property. She sells a piece of residential land located in Auckland to Jim. Mary is in New Zealand at the time of the sale, but she is not a New Zealand citizen and does not hold a residence class visa granted under the Immigration Act. Mary is an “offshore RLWT person”.  The definition of an individual “offshore RLWT person” is the same as that for an individual “offshore person” under the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see ¶7-018). However, in the case of non-individuals, the definitions are different. A person (other than a statutory trustee company) is considered to be an “offshore RLWT person” if any of the following conditions are met: ▪ the person is incorporated outside New Zealand ▪ the person is not a natural person and is registered outside New Zealand ▪ the person is constituted under foreign law ▪ the person is a company or a limited partnership and more than 25% of the company’s directors or of the limited partnership’s general partners are offshore RLWT persons ▪ the person is a company and more than 25% of the company’s shareholder decision-making rights are held directly or indirectly by offshore RLWT persons, or ▪ the person is a limited partnership or a look-through company (LTC), and more than 25% of the partnership’s partnership shares or of the LTC’s effective look-through interests are held directly or indirectly by offshore RLWT persons. A trust is considered an “offshore RLWT person” if any of the following are met: ▪ more than 25% of the trustees are offshore RLWT persons ▪ more than 25% of the people that have the power to appoint or remove a trustee of the trust, or to amend the trust deed, are offshore RLWT persons ▪ all natural person beneficiaries and all natural person discretionary beneficiaries of the trust are offshore RLWT persons  ▪ all beneficiaries and discretionary beneficiaries of the trust are offshore RLWT persons ▪ a beneficiary, including a discretionary beneficiary, that is an offshore RLWT person has received a distribution from the trust in one of the last four years before the relevant disposal of residential land and, if the beneficiary is a natural person, the total distributions to the beneficiary for the relevant year are more than $5,000, or ▪ the trust has disposed of residential land within four years before the relevant disposal of residential land and the trust has a beneficiary, including a discretionary beneficiary, that is an offshore RLWT person. The definition of “offshore RLWT person” for a trust is intended to ensure that gains do not escape tax through manipulation of the trust. It is not intended that it would normally apply to properties held in ordinary family trusts where some of the natural person beneficiaries may be New Zealand citizens but now reside overseas. Example 3: Debbie and Greg are the settlors and trustees of a family trust. They are both New Zealand citizens and live in New Zealand. Dan and Natalie are discretionary beneficiaries of the trust and are also New Zealand citizens. Dan lives in New Zealand, but Natalie has lived in Australia for the past five years and has not been back to New Zealand. The trust property consists of the family home in New Zealand as well as some shares and money held in a savings account. Each year, Dan and Natalie receive around $1,000 each in distributions from the trust. Debbie and Greg as trustees of the trust are not offshore RLWT persons, because they themselves are not offshore RLWT persons and, of the two beneficiaries, only Natalie is an offshore RLWT person, but she has not received more than $5,000 in distributions from the trust in any of the previous four years.  A corporate trustee will be able to qualify for the non-offshore exemption if it meets both the company and trust criteria above. If a statutory trustee company is an offshore RLWT person, a trustee for which it acts will not be an offshore RLWT person if it would not otherwise be one.  Person required to pay RLWT Under s RL 2, the vendor is liable to pay an amount of RLWT, but the vendor’s conveyancer is treated as the vendor’s agent in relation to the RLWT and must provide returns and satisfy the vendor’s liability. That is, the vendor’s conveyancer is the “paying agent” in relation to RLWT. If the vendor does not have a conveyancer, the purchaser’s conveyancer will be the paying agent. If neither the vendor nor purchaser has a conveyancer, the purchaser will be the paying agent. Conveyancer Under the definition in s YA 1, “conveyancer” means a lawyer, incorporated law firm, conveyancing practitioner, or incorporated conveyancing firm that provides conveyancing services, as that term is used in the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act 2006, to the vendor or purchaser using a New Zealand-based trust account. Associated persons Under s RL 3, if the vendor and purchaser are associated persons, the vendor is not liable to pay RLWT. In this case, the purchaser (as the withholding agent) has a withholding tax obligation under s BE 1 and the standard requirements for other withholding taxes applies. The date the associated persons test is applied is the date on which a residential land purchase amount is paid. This is because the RLWT rules apply to a residential land purchase amount paid in relation to a disposal, rather than the disposal itself. Not the vendor’s agent for other purposes While the paying agent is considered to be the vendor’s agent for the purposes of RLWT, the paying agent is not considered the vendor’s agent more generally solely because of their agency for RLWT. Liability for underlying RLWT A paying agent is not jointly and severally liable in relation to the vendor’s RLWT debt, despite their obligation to satisfy the vendor’s RLWT liability. They may, however, be liable for the RLWT debt, if they have retained the RLWT amount from a residential land payment amount and have failed to pay the retained RLWT to the Commissioner.  If the vendor and purchaser are associated persons, the purchaser is the withholding agent and is therefore liable for the underlying RLWT, in a similar way to standard withholding taxes. Amount of RLWT There are three calculation methods for RLWT, with the amount of RLWT payable being the lesser of the amounts calculated under these methods. Note, however, that the third method is not available where the paying agent is the purchaser’s conveyancer or the purchaser themselves. All amounts are GST exclusive to ensure it is clear that RLWT is calculated net of GST. First method — s RL 4(2) The first of the three calculation methods is as follows: RLWT rate × (current purchase price − vendor’s acquisition cost) where: RLWT rate is the top individual marginal tax rate (33% (39% from 1 April 2021)) or, if the vendor is a company that is not acting as a trustee, the company tax rate (28%) current purchase price is the purchase price agreed by the vendor and purchaser vendor’s acquisition cost is the purchase price paid by the vendor on acquisition. It is expected that the vendor’s acquisition cost will generally be available from Quotable Value. Second method — s RL 4(4) The second calculation method is as follows: 0.10 × current purchase price In most cases, the RLWT payable will be the lesser of the amounts calculated under these first two methods. Example 4:  Virginia is an offshore RLWT person who agrees to sell her residential property in Tauranga to Thomas. Thomas pays a $100,000 deposit and another $400,000 upon settlement. In determining Virginia’s RLWT liability, the “current purchase price” is $500,000. Virginia originally acquired the residential property for $350,000. The “vendor’s acquisition cost” for the purposes of determining Virginia’s RLWT liability is $350,000. Virginia does not have a mortgage on the property, and she has no outstanding rates. RLWT calculated using the formula in s RL 4(2) is 33% × ($500,000 − $350,000), or $49,500. RLWT calculated using the formula in s RL 4(4) is 10% × $500,000, or $50,000. Therefore, the amount of RLWT payable is $49,500.  Third method — s RL 4(6) RLWT is generally paid before other disbursements. However, a vendor may have a mortgage secured over the residential land being disposed of and the mortgagee may require the vendor’s mortgage obligation to be discharged before the title to the residential land can be released. In most cases, this should not be a problem, but in some situations the amount of RLWT payable calculated using the two methods outlined above may result in insufficient funds to discharge the vendor’s mortgage. The third calculation method under s RL 4(6) is only available when the vendor or vendor’s conveyancer is the person who must pay the RLWT. The amount is the greater of zero and the amount calculated as follows: current purchase price − security discharge amount − outstanding rates where: security discharge amount is the total of the amounts required by licensed security holders to discharge their mortgages or other securities over the residential land, or zero outstanding rates is the amount of local authority rates outstanding. For these purposes: licensed security holder means a New Zealand registered bank or a licensed non-bank deposit taker (as defined in s 4 of the Nonbank Deposit Takers Act 2013) holding a mortgage or other security over the residential land.  Example 5: Consider the previous example of Virginia and Thomas. Recall that the RLWT payable using the methods set out in s RL 4(2) and (4) will be $49,500 and $50,000. However, now Virginia has a mortgage with a New Zealand bank for $460,000. In addition, Virginia has outstanding rates of $360 owing to her local council. Since Virginia’s conveyancer is the paying agent the third calculation method set out in s RL 4(6) is relevant for both the mortgage and the local authority rates. Using the third calculation method in s RL 4(6), the amount of RLWT calculated is $500,000 − $460,000 − $360, or $39,640. As this is less than $49,500 and $50,000, $39,640 is the amount of RLWT payable.  Note that the second of the three methods discussed above is effectively the default method for calculating the amount of RLWT in situations where information about the vendor’s acquisition cost or New Zealand mortgage is unavailable. When the obligation arises The obligation to retain/withhold and pay RLWT is intended to arise upon settlement when, in most cases, the bulk of the purchase price is paid by the purchaser to the vendor via a conveyancer. At this point the RLWT paying or withholding agent should retain or withhold RLWT from the funds being paid. Due dates for RLWT to be paid to the Commissioner Once the obligation for RLWT has arisen and the appropriate amount of RLWT has been withheld or retained from a residential land purchase amount, the standard due dates for interim and other tax payments made on a monthly basis apply. The due date is the 20th day of the following month. Tax credit for RLWT paid A person has a tax credit for the amount of RLWT paid in relation to residential land they have disposed of in the tax year in which the disposal occurs. This deals with the situation that could occur where, under the bright-line test, the income tax liability for the disposal occurs in one tax year but, under the RLWT rules, the RLWT obligation does not arise until the following tax year. To the extent that the amount of RLWT paid exceeds the person’s income tax liability in relation to the disposal of the residential property,  the RLWT credit can be used to satisfy the person’s other income tax liabilities. If the person has no other income tax liabilities, the excess RLWT may be refunded. Interim claim process and certificate of exemption Under s RL 6, the Commissioner may repay an amount of RLWT if and to the extent that: ▪ the RLWT credit is likely to be a surplus credit for the year, treating the person as only having income and deductions for land and the relevant tax rate in s RL 4(3) (either 33% (39% from 1 April 2021) or the company rate of 28%) ▪ the person has no outstanding tax obligations, and ▪ the person provides the information and accompanying documents specified in s 54D of the Tax Administration Act. See form IR 1102 (April 2019). Under s 54E of the Tax Administration Act, a certificate of exemption is available to persons who are in the business of developing land, dividing land into lots, or erecting buildings and who either have a good tax compliance history for the previous two years or provide adequate security. For newly formed entities that would have difficulty meeting the two-year good compliance history requirement, another taxpayer associated with the newly formed entity is able to meet the two-year good compliance history requirement on their behalf. This only applies to companies in the same group or partners in a limited partnership. A person who meets the requirements for the main home exclusion under s CB 16A may also apply for a certificate of exemption. Any application for a certificate of exemption must be in the prescribed form and provide the required information: see form IR 1103 (April 2019). The interim claim process is still available for taxpayers who do not meet the requirements for, or have not been issued with, an RLWT exemption certificate. Information to be provided by vendors to paying and withholding agents  Section 54C of the Tax Administration Act sets out the information that vendors must provide to their paying or withholding agent, or the purchaser, so that the agent is able to fulfil any RLWT obligations. The information requirements in s 54C of the Tax Administration Act only apply if the vendor disposes of the residential land within the fiveyear bright-line period (two-year bright-line period for land acquired before 29 March 2018). The calculation of the five-year period for the purposes of RLWT is the same as the bright-line test. The bright-line date is defined in s CB 6A and discussed at ¶7-050. In most cases, the start date of the five-year period will be the date on which the instrument to transfer the land to the person was registered under the Land Transfer Act 2017 (before 12 November 2018, the Land Transfer Act 1952). Where the transfer is not registered before the bright-line date, the start date will be the vendor’s acquisition date. The section only applies where the start date is on or after 1 October 2015. The end date is, in most cases, the date on which the person enters into an agreement for the disposal of the residential land. Where the disposal is within the five-year bright-line period, the vendor is required to give their conveyancer or the purchaser’s conveyancer or the purchaser (if the vendor does not have a conveyancer or the vendor is associated with the purchaser) the relevant information in the form prescribed by the Commissioner before the relevant residential land purchase amount is paid. See form IR 1101 (April 2018). Section 54C(4) requires vendors to provide, at the very least, their full name, address, IRD number, and whether they are offshore RLWT persons. If they are offshore RLWT persons, the vendor must also state whether they are associated with the purchaser and whether the residential land purchase amount would be income under the bright-line test, ignoring the application of the other land taxing provisions in ss CB 6–CB 12 and the main home exclusion. Section 54C(3) provides that a vendor’s statement needs to be accompanied by relevant and appropriate documents. The Commissioner will prescribe what documents will be acceptable in supporting the person’s statement. If the vendor is not an offshore RLWT person, the following people must verify, as prescribed by the  Commissioner, the information and any relevant and appropriate documents: ▪ for a vendor company or a look-through company, a director who is not an offshore RLWT person ▪ for a vendor limited partnership, a general partner of the partnership who is not an offshore RLWT person ▪ for a vendor trust, a trustee of the trust who is not an offshore RLWT person. The information must be retained by the person who receives it for seven years, unless they receive it as a purchaser. If they receive it as a purchaser, they must give a copy of it to the Commissioner within one month of receiving it, but they do not need to retain the information afterwards. Information to be provided by paying and withholding agents to the Commissioner Section 54B of the Tax Administration Act requires paying and withholding agents to provide a statement, in the prescribed form, detailing their RLWT withholding obligations at the time the RLWT must be paid to the Commissioner. The statement must also be provided if the RLWT calculation means there is no RLWT to be paid (for example, where the vendor has made a loss on sale or the mortgage exceeds the sale price). See form IR 1100 (April 2019). The Commissioner may also allow further time for paying and withholding agents to furnish their RLWT statements. However, this may affect a vendor’s ability to apply for a refund if he or she wants to file an interim income tax return shortly after the disposal, as refunds will not be issued until the payment of RLWT to the Commissioner is reconciled with the vendor’s account. Penalties Under s RL 2(6) the rules relating to penalties as set out in the Tax Administration Act apply to paying agents as though they have failed to pay an amount of withholding tax equal to the amount of RLWT liabilities they failed to satisfy. This means that the general penalties  rules that apply to withholding taxes (such as late filing penalties) apply to RLWT, irrespective of whether the person required to satisfy the RLWT liability is a paying agent or a withholding agent. A paying agent is not liable for a penalty for failing to pay an amount of RLWT if it was reasonable for the paying agent to rely on the information provided by the vendor under s 54C to consider that RLWT was not payable. Late payment penalties Late payment penalties only apply when the paying agent has subtracted or retained the amount of RLWT from the residential land purchase amount but has failed to pay the RLWT to the Commissioner. When the paying agent has not retained the RLWT, late payment penalties do not apply. This is because in most cases, the paying agent is not liable for the underlying amount of RLWT and once they have released the funds to the vendor, they are not able to pay the RLWT out of the residential land purchase amount. Reporting to professional body The Commissioner is able to provide details of RLWT paying agents to their relevant professional body when they have failed to fulfil their RLWT obligations. This allows professional bodies to take appropriate action against members who do not comply with their legal obligations under the RLWT. It is intended that Inland Revenue will report a person only when there are repeated or deliberate failures. Application date The RLWT rules came into force on 1 July 2016. For further discussion of the rules, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 30– 56. Law: IT07 subpart RL, ss LA 6, LB 6B, RA 6C, RA 15, YA 1; TAA ss 18D(1), 54B–54E, sch 7, pt A, cl 12  TAXATION OF DISPOSALS OF LAND ¶7-025 Definitions of “land” and “disposal”  There is some guidance on what is land and what is a disposal. Land “Land” as defined in s YA 1 includes any estate or interest and any option to acquire land, but does not include a mortgage. Consequently, the land disposal provisions potentially have application to: ▪ a registered proprietor ▪ a purchaser under an unconditional contract for sale who assigns that interest: see Mills v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,025 ▪ the holder of an option ▪ the holder of an interest in a time share, and ▪ a lessee. The land disposal provisions apply to the disposal of parts of land, the whole of the land and land disposed together with other land. Buildings and other structures attached to land are classified under the general law as fixtures that are part of the land to which they are attached. See further at ¶13-014. Disposal In s YA 1, a disposal of land is defined to include: ▪ a compulsory acquisition under a statute by the Crown, a local authority or a public authority, and ▪ a mortgagee’s disposal of land following default by the mortgagor. The most common form of a disposal of land is likely to be its sale. An exchange of assets may be classified as a sale. See Tasman Forestry Ltd v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,147 (CA). Law: IT07 ss CB 23B, YA 1  ¶7-045 Purpose or intention of disposal of land  Income includes an amount derived from the sale of land if the land was acquired for one or more purposes or intentions that included the purpose or intention of disposal. If land is bought with the intention of retaining some and selling a part (eg to finance the purchase), the sale of the part gives rise to a taxable situation. For this rule to apply it appears that the purpose or intention of resale must be definitive in some way, ie the purpose or intention of selling the land must exist at the time the land was acquired. However, the purpose or intention of selling does not have to be the dominant purpose or intention for acquiring the land for the profit to be taxable. See Morrow v C of IR (1989) 11 NZTC 6,053 and Case N59 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,457 at 3,462. When acquisition is without any definitive aim or is merely in the vague and general hope that it would be a good investment, there is no taxable purpose. See Jurgens & Doyle v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,074 and Anzamco Ltd (in liq) v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,522, where the High Court took the view that the purpose of resale provisions did not apply when there is simply a recognition that the land may need to be disposed of at some future date. This is because that recognition does not amount to a speculative purpose or intention. If land is purchased for a private purpose, it is unlikely that recognition at the time of purchase of an increase in value, which may be able to be captured in the future, has the consequence of an acquisition with the purpose or intention of resale. In Case W23 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,238, a building company purchased a block of bare land for eventual development into a residence for the company’s shareholders. The plan was never implemented. After 28 years, the land was sold for development purposes. In the course of finding that the gain on sale was not income, the Taxation Review Authority remarked that the fact that, at the time of purchase, the taxpayer also had it in mind that one day the property might increase in value, and that some of that increase might be available to him in his old age, did not thereby convert the purchase into being one for the purposes of resale. The possibility of an increase in value of residential real estate over a period of years is a commonplace adjunct of most such purchases. Intention or purpose at time of acquisition  It is the person’s purpose or intention at the time of acquisition that is material, ie the person must have reached a decision to sell the land, or a part or interest in the land, at the time of acquisition. If a purpose or intention of disposal has not materialised by that time, the transaction is not caught under this limb. Some fine distinctions can arise under this rule. Example 1: Property might be acquired with no particular intention at all, except the vague general hope that it will be a good investment. This does not amount to a purpose of sale. See G Williams v FC of T 74 ATC 4237.  However: Example 2: A conditional purpose of sale, such as the contingency of a rise in value subsequent to acquisition, may amount to a purpose of sale. See Williams Property Developments Ltd v C of IR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,537 (CA).  It is the intention or purpose of the purchaser and not of any relative or adviser that is to be considered. The difficulty of rebutting evidence of a purpose of disposal is illustrated by the following case. Example 3: A taxpayer purchased a block of land from an estate. Before acquisition the taxpayer had organised for a sketch subdivision plan of the block. After acquisition, some of the land was sold and the remainder was kept for private purposes for some time and then sold. The court held the taxpayer was liable to tax on the profit from the sale of both blocks of land. The taxpayer did not, at the time of acquisition, have a separate intention in respect of the piece of land retained for private purposes that was independent of the overall intention to dispose of the whole block of land for a gain. The intention to acquire the land for subdivisional purposes was only one of the taxpayer’s intentions. See Morrow v C of IR (1989) 11 NZTC 6,053.  Determination of intention is largely a question of evidence, ie ascertained on a subjective basis. Should the transaction be challenged by the Commissioner, it is important to have sufficient evidence of intention, such as letters to professional and financial advisers, and bank memoranda, before the date of acquisition and valuation reports from real estate agents or a registered valuer. In the case of a company, a court would consider the company’s constitution and all other relevant matters. Indicia of speculation include the period of ownership, the frequency and number of similar transactions, the circumstances responsible for realisation and intention to sell manifested before acquisition. Example 4: A trust taxpayer purchased and sold a number of residential properties in the vicinity of a shopping centre over a period of four years. During this time there was a change in the zoning of the properties purchased and the taxpayer had made submissions to the local council in support of the rezoning. The Taxation Review Authority held that, on the evidence, the taxpayer became engaged in property speculation or trading as a business, a scheme or undertaking, or with the intention of acquisition for resale. Profits derived from the sale of properties purchased after the date the business commenced were taxable. See Case V3 (2001) 20 NZTC 10,021.  Example 5: A partnership of two couples purchased the freehold title to a block of land in the Queenstown area in May 1997. Less than three years later the partnership sold the land to an associated entity. The Commissioner assessed the partnership for income tax on the transaction on the basis that the partnership had acquired the land for the purpose or intention of disposal. Initially the Taxation Review Authority decided that the ascertainment of purpose or intention should be answered by looking at the purpose or intention of each individual partner (see Case Y3 (2007) 23 NZTC 13,028) at the time of acquisition of the interest in land. However, in the appeal, the High Court overturned that decision and decided that the question of purpose or intention should be answered by looking at the partnership’s purpose. In this case, despite the fact that certain partners took steps that appeared to demonstrate an intention or purpose of disposal the High Court concluded that “the evidence establishes a tolerably clear picture of these four taxpayers as users of the property they had freeholded to best advantage, rather than being a partnership that acquired the land with a purpose or intention of disposing of it, whether that was a single purpose or one among a number”. See C of IR v Boanas (2008) 23 NZTC 22,046.  There is no time limit specified between the date of purchase and the date of sale, so no matter how long a piece of land is held, if it was acquired for subsequent resale, the eventual sale proceeds will be included in income. In the case of a taxpayer buying an investment property as part of a superannuation/retirement plan, it is unlikely that the purpose of resale provisions will apply. The land, in this case, has not been acquired for the purpose of resale, even though there may be the possibility that in the future rental income derived may be insufficient and the property may have to be sold to release capital to live off. A transferee of property under a settlement of relationship property will acquire the intention of the transferor. See ¶7-440. There are exclusions from the purpose of resale provisions for certain residential and business premises. See further at ¶7-211 and ¶7-250, respectively. In July 2016, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/06, “Income tax — Land acquired for a purpose or with an intention of disposal” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 8, September 2016 at 18). The item discusses when s CB 6 will apply, providing a number of examples to illustrate this. It also discusses the relationship between s CB 6 and the two-year “bright-line” test in s CB 6A and emphasises that the two-year bright-line test can only apply if none of ss CB 6 to CB 12 apply (see ¶7-050). Note that the bright-line period was increased to five years for land acquired on or after 29 March 2018. For a discussion of the timing of the acquisition of land, see ¶7-047. Law: IT07 s CB 6  ¶7-047 Date of acquisition of land Section CB 15B provides the date of acquisition of an estate, interest or option that is land is the date that begins a period in which the person has an estate or interest in, or an option to acquire, the land. Practically, this will generally be the date that a binding agreement is entered into or an option to acquire that land is acquired. The rule applies whether the land is acquired alone or jointly or in common with another person.  Note that s CB 15B does not apply in relation to the date of acquisition for the purposes of the bright-line test in s CB 6A (see ¶7-050). Exceptions to rule There are two exceptions to the general rule. The first is if a person enters into an agreement on behalf of a company to be formed. In that case, the company will be treated as existing from when the person enters the agreement. Note that in QB 17/02 (discussed below) the Commissioner notes that there are no bright-line test implications (see ¶7-050) for a person who acquires land on behalf of a company yet to be formed where the company subsequently ratifies the contract for the acquisition of the land. This is because s 182 of the Companies Act 1993 allows for ratification of pre-incorporation contracts, and at common law an effective ratification constitutes the relationship of principal and agent retrospectively. This means that the person who acquired the land on behalf of the company yet to be formed has not themselves acquired (and subsequently disposed of) a land interest. The second exception to the general rule in s CB 15B relates to a person who exercises an option to acquire land and acquires the land. In that case, the person will be treated as acquiring the land at the time they exercise the option. The rule in s CB 15B is overridden if a provision in subpart FB (Transfers of relationship property) or FC (Distribution, transmission, and gifts of property) provides for the timing of the transaction. Also, if land is acquired from an associated person or on an amalgamation, the acquisition date of the land may be different from that under s CB 15B. Commissioner’s QWBA In March 2017, the Commissioner released a Question we’ve been asked, QB 17/02, “Income tax — Date of acquisition of land, and start date for 2-year bright-line test” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 125). The QWBA provides further clarity on how s CB 15B operates, and also sets out when the 2-year period starts for the brightline test in s CB 6A (see ¶7-050). (Note that since release of the QWBA the bright-line period has been increased to five years for land acquired on or after 29 March 2018.)  In relation to the timing of acquisition of land under s CB 15B, the QWBA emphasises that what is relevant is when the person acquired their first interest in the land being disposed of. A person will often acquire different interests (each being “land”) in the same piece of underlying physical land at different times. For example, in a typical purchase of land situation, the purchaser acquires an equitable interest in the estate when a binding contract to purchase the land is formed, which is before they acquire the legal interest (when the land is transferred to them). What is relevant is when they acquired their first interest in the land (ie the particular estate) that they are disposing of. This will typically be when a binding sale and purchase agreement is entered into, even if it is subject to conditions. Other interests in the same underlying physical land will not be relevant. For example, if the sale of a freehold estate may give rise to taxation and the date of acquisition is relevant, the fact that the person previously had a leasehold interest in the land will not be relevant. The time at which the first interest in the freehold estate arose will be the time at which that land was acquired. The QWBA notes that when a person first acquires an estate or interest in land (relevant to determining whether the bright-line test can apply to them — see ¶7-050) is not necessarily the same date as the date the person is treated as acquiring land for the purposes of the land provisions (for example, where land is acquired through an option, or on a relationship property transfer), and acknowledges that to the extent the item “Taxation (Bright-line Test for Residential Land) Act 2015”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 78 suggests otherwise, it is incorrect. The following example from the QWBA illustrates when land is acquired under the general rule in s CB 15B(1) and also notes when the period for the bright-line test starts. Example 1: Binding sale and purchase (S&P) agreement  Sally entered into a sale and purchase agreement to purchase some land (the freehold estate). The agreement was subject to Sally obtaining satisfactory LIM and building reports within a specified time frame. Those conditions were fulfilled, and the sale was settled in due course. When Sally sold the property some time later, one of the land provisions in subpart CB potentially applied and the date that she acquired the land was relevant. For the purposes of the land sale provisions in subpart CB, other than the bright-line test, Sally acquired the land when she and the vendor entered into the binding sale and purchase agreement, even though that agreement was subject to conditions, because that was when Sally first had an equitable interest in the land. Because Sally first got an estate or interest in the land when she and the vendor entered into the binding sale and purchase agreement, that is also the relevant date for determining if the bright-line legislation potentially applies. If the agreement was entered into on or after 1 October 2015, the bright-line legislation can apply to Sally’s disposal of the land if none of ss CB 6 to CB 12 apply. The period for the bright-line test (which may apply if none of ss CB 6 to CB 12 apply) starts on the date the transfer of title was registered to Sally.  Where a nominee completes a purchase, the nominee acquires the land under s CB 15B on the date they are nominated as the purchaser by way of deed of nomination. If what has occurred is an assignment of contractual rights and the parties are not associated, the assignee acquires the land under s CB 15B on the date of the assignment. This is when the assignee first has an equitable interest in the land. If the assignor and assignee are associated, the assignee’s date of acquisition for the purposes of most of the land provisions (ss CB 7 to CB 12, and CB 14) will be the date that the assignor first had their equitable interest in the land (ie typically, the date they entered into the contract to purchase the land, even if some conditions still needed to  be met). This is because s CB 15(2) treats someone who acquires land from an associated person as having acquired it on the date the associated person did. The QWBA contains examples of when land is acquired under s CB 15B where there is a nomination and when there is an assignment of contractual rights. In the original draft the Commissioner did not consider the exception in s CB 15B(3) would apply in a “first right option” scenario. However, in the final item, the Commissioner has stated that, although a “first right option” (eg a right of first refusal or a right of first offer) is not, strictly speaking, an option, if land is acquired through exercising such a preemptive right, it will have become an option by that point. On this basis, the special rule in s CB 15B(3) will also apply if land is acquired through exercising a pre-emptive right, and the land will be acquired on the date the option is exercised. The following example from the QWBA illustrates when land is acquired under s CB 15B where an option or “first right option” is involved. Example 2: Option to purchase land  Sanjay purchased an option to buy some land for a specified sum. Sanjay exercised the option. By doing so, a binding contract for the sale and purchase of the land was created on the terms set out in the option contract. The sale was settled in due course. When Sanjay went to sell the land several years later, one of the land provisions in subpart CB potentially applied and the date that Sanjay had acquired the land (the freehold estate) was relevant.  Because Sanjay acquired the freehold through the exercise of the option, the exception to the general rule (contained in s CB 15B(3)) applies. Under the special rule in s CB 15B(3), for the purposes of the land sale provisions in subpart CB, other than the brightline test, Sanjay acquired the land (the freehold) when he exercised the option. However, because Sanjay first got an estate or interest in the land when he acquired the option, that is the relevant date for determining if the bright-line legislation potentially applies. If Sanjay acquired the option on or after 1 October 2015, the bright-line legislation can apply to Sanjay’s disposal of the land if none of ss CB 6 to CB 12 apply. The period for the bright-line test (which may apply if none of ss CB 6 to CB 12 apply) starts on the date the transfer of title was registered to Sanjay.  Law: IT07 s CB 15B  ¶7-050 Acquisition and disposal of residential land within five years — bright-line test An objective “bright-line” land sale test for residential land requires income tax to be paid on gains from the disposal of certain residential property acquired and disposed of within five years (two years for land acquired before 29 March 2018), with the exception of the main family home. The purpose of the bright-line test is to supplement the purpose or intention test (see ¶7-045). The bright-line test applies only where none of ss CB 6–CB 12 apply. However, ss CB 13 and CB 14 only apply when the bright-line test does not apply. The bright-line test came into force on 1 October 2015. It only applies to a person’s disposal of land if the person acquired their estate or interest in the land on or after 1 October 2015. Where there is a standard acquisition of land, the date a person acquires their estate or interest will generally be the date of entry into an agreement to purchase the land. This means the bright-line test will only apply to the sale of land if the agreement for purchase of the land was entered into on or after 1 October 2015. Note that in QB 17/02, “Income tax — Date of acquisition of land, and start date for 2-year bright-line test” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 125), the Commissioner has confirmed that the date someone first acquires an estate or interest in land (relevant for determining whether the bright-line test can apply) is not always the same as when they acquire land under s CB 15B (see ¶7-047). While  the dates may generally be the same in a typical land purchase, there are other situations where they may not, such as acquiring land through the exercise of an option or on a settlement of relationship property. (Note that, since release of the QWBA, the bright-line test has been increased from two years to five years for land acquired on or after 29 March 2018.) Acquisition date The five-year period for the bright-line test (two-year period for land acquired before 29 March 2018) runs from the date of acquisition to the bright-line date. The date of acquisition is the latest date on which the person acquires an estate or interest in the land. Generally, this will be the date the title to the land is registered for the purchase of the property. The bright-line date for the disposal of the property is generally the date that a person enters into an agreement for the sale of the property. There are a number of situations when land is acquired that do not follow the standard land sale process. In those situations, separate rules apply for when the bright-line period starts.  Start Dates Type of acquisition  Start date of bright-line test  Standard purchase of land  Registration  Sales “off the plan”  Date of entry into a contract to purchase  Sale of freehold acquired as Date of grant of leasehold estate leaseholder under a perpetuallyrenewable lease (Glasgow lease) Other sales where no registration  Latest date property acquired (according to ordinary rules)  Subdivided land  The original date of registration for the undivided land  Sale where there is no registration of title  Where there is no registration of title, the start date for the bright-line test is the latest date the person acquired the land under ordinary rules. For example, for a sale of a contract to buy land, the start date will be the date that a person enters into a contract to purchase the property. This means that for a sale of a contract to buy, the bright-line period runs from the date that a person enters into a contract to purchase the land to the date that a person enters into a contract to sell the land.  Sales “off the plan” A sale “off the plan” is where a person enters into a contract to acquire a parcel of land that is being developed or subdivided, where the title for the land does not yet exist. Their interest in the land is contingent on the completion of the subdivision. The person is agreeing to acquire registered title in the land once a separate title exists. The start date in this situation is the date the person enters into the binding agreement for the sale and purchase of the land, not the date the title is transferred to them. Example 1: Sale “off the plan”  Denise is not subject to the bright-line test as the start date for the bright-line is 1 July 2016 (the date she entered into a contract to purchase “off the plan”) and the end date is 1 March 2019 (the date she entered into a contract to sell). (Note that as Denise acquired the land before 29 March 2018, the bright-line period is only two years.) Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 80.  Subdivided land The start date for the bright-line period when land is subdivided is the date the owner originally acquired the undivided land. Example 2: Subdivision  The start date for the bright-line period is 1 May 2018 and the end date is 1 May 2024. As a result, Bob’s sale of the second section to Carla is not covered by the bright-line test. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 80.  Conversion of a lease with a perpetual right of renewal into freehold title When a person has a lease with a perpetual right of renewal that they then convert into freehold land, the start date for the bright-line period is the date the person is granted the lease. This is consistent with other tax provisions that treat a lease with a perpetual right of renewal similar to freehold estates. Example 3: Lease with perpetual right of renewal  The start date for Kelly’s bright-line period is 1 July 2016 (the date the lease with perpetual right of renewal is granted) and the end date is 1 April 2019 (the date she entered into agreement to sell the land). (Note that as Kelly acquired the land before 29 March 2018, the bright-line period is two years.) Gains from Kelly’s sale of the land are not taxable under the bright-line test.  Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 80.  Change of trustee A provision ensures that a change of trustee does not trigger the application of the bright-line test. When a trust owns land and there is a change to the trustees, a new instrument is registered to reflect the change of trustee event, and without this provision this change of trustee would affect the timing of the bright-line period. It was not intended that these types of transfers would trigger the application of the bright-line test because the trust property has not been disposed of to another party. Bright-line date or date of disposal The bright-line date for the disposal of the property is generally the date that a person enters into an agreement for the sale of the property. There are several situations where land is disposed of and there is no agreement to dispose of the property. In these situations, the proposed end date for the bright-line period differs from the standard rule.  End Dates Type of disposal  End date of bright-line period  Standard purchase of land  Date of entry into agreement for sale  Gift  Date of gift (generally registration of title)  Compulsory acquisition  Date of compulsory acquisition  Mortgagee sale  Date land disposed of by mortgagee  Other disposals where no contract to sell  Date of disposal according to ordinary rules  Gift  For gifts, the end date for the bright-line period is the date the person makes the gift of the residential land. This will be the date when the donor has done everything necessary to be done to transfer the property and render the settlement binding. For a gift of a registerable interest in land, this will mean the end date for the bright-line period is the date the interest is registered. Example 4: Gift  The start date for the bright-line period is 1 May 2018 (the date Henrietta acquired registered title) and the end date is 1 February 2020 (the date Ingrid acquired registered title). Henrietta will be subject to the bright-line test for her gift of land. Under ordinary tax rules, gifts of land are treated as if they are transferred at market value. As a result, Henrietta will be deemed to have transferred the land to Ingrid at market value and the $50,000 gain will be taxable. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 81.  Compulsorily acquired When the land is compulsorily acquired by the Crown, the end date of the bright-line period is the date that the land is compulsorily acquired. This will generally be 14 days after the proclamation taking the land is published in the Gazette under s 26(3) of the Public Works Act 1981. Mortgagee sale When land is disposed of by a mortgagee exercising their right to dispose of the property, the end date for the bright-line period is the date when the land is disposed of by the mortgagee. Other sales If there is another type of disposal of land, the date of disposal is the date that the land is disposed of according to ordinary rules.  Example 5: Standard lease (no perpetual right of renewal)  The start date for the bright-line test is 1 May 2018 (the date of registration of title for purchase) and the end date is 1 June 2022 (the date she entered into agreement to sell the land). Jo’s proceeds from the sale of the land are taxable under the bright-line test. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 81.  Definition of “residential land” The bright-line test applies only to “residential land”, which is defined as: ▪ land that has a dwelling on it ▪ land for which the owner has an arrangement to build a dwelling on it, or ▪ bare land that may be used for building a dwelling under the relevant operative district plan, but does not include land that is: ▪ used predominantly as business premises, or ▪ farmland. Dwelling The general definition of “dwelling” in s YA 1 applies, that is, any place used predominantly as a place of residence or abode. However, the definition is modified for the bright-line test by specifically including serviced apartments and excluding rest homes and retirement villages. Example 6: Development  Andrew buys an empty plot of land that is zoned for residential purposes. He plans to develop the plot by subdividing it into four lots and building houses on each of the lots. Andrew sells Lot 1 “off the plan” to Bob. One month later, Bob sells Lot 1 to Carla. Lot 1 would be “residential land” and Bob’s sale would be subject to the bright-line test. This is because there is an arrangement to build a dwelling on the land, and because it is bare land that can have a dwelling erected on it under the relevant district plan. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 82.  Business premises Residential land does not include land used predominantly as business premises. “Business premises” has its ordinary meaning within the Income Tax Act. This generally requires a building on the land that is occupied by a person in the course of running their business. The exclusion does not require that the land be occupied by the owner as their business premises. As a result, properties rented out by the owner to other persons to use as their business premises are covered by this exclusion. Example 7: Workers’ quarters Steve owns land that contains a factory that is used to process food. The land also has workers’ quarters on it, which Steve provides to his employees to use as residences. The land is used predominantly as business premises and so is entitled to the business premises exception.  Example 8: Empty factory Velma purchases an empty factory that she plans to develop into an apartment building. Before beginning construction and within two years of her acquisition, Velma receives a good offer for the building and sells it to William. Velma has an arrangement to put a dwelling on the land and so meets the first criterion for residential land. The land does not qualify for the business premises exclusion as the factory is empty and not being used as business premises at the time of disposal. As a result, the land is “residential land” and subject to the bright-line test. Examples taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 83.  In August 2019, Inland Revenue released QB 19/13, “Income tax – when does the business premises exclusion to the bright-line test  apply?”, which considers the business premises exclusion that applies for the bright-line test under s CB 6A (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 68). Note that a separate business premises exclusion under s CB 19 is relevant where the sale is potentially taxable under ss CB 6 to CB 11 and Inland Revenue has also released QB 19/14, “Income tax — when does the business premises exclusion in s CB 19 apply to preclude land sales from being taxed under ss CB 6 to CB 11?” to deal with that exclusion (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 75). Section CB 19, QB 19/14 and the main differences between the two business premises exclusions are discussed at ¶7-250. The most likely situation where the bright-line business premises exclusion needs to be considered is where a person sells land that has both a dwelling and business premises on it. The presence of the dwelling means the land will be residential land and subject to the bright-line test, unless the land is used predominantly as business premises. QB 19/13 focuses on that type of situation. Land that has been used predominantly as business premises is not “residential land” and is therefore not subject to the bright-line test, even if the land has a dwelling on it. For these purposes, the Commissioner considers “business premises” means land, typically including a building, with any surrounding associated land, from which a person carries on a business. In some cases, land can be business premises even if there is no building on the land. For instance, a quarry may be business premises even if it does not have a building on it. It will be up to the taxpayer to show that the land is business premises. There must also be a business being carried on from that building. “Carrying on” a business from a location requires some or all or the activities of the business to be conducted continuously or habitually from there. QB 19/13 confirms that the business premises may be those of the landowner or of a third party such as a tenant or tenants. Land will be used predominantly as business premises where: • more than 50% of the area of the land has been used as business premises, and  • the land has been used as business premises for more than 50% of the time the seller owned it. From time to time, particularly where the split between the business premises use of the land and the land’s other uses is close, the nature and the importance of the land’s different uses should be considered to determine which of the uses is the predominant use. This is the approach the courts have taken to the meaning of “predominantly”. A consequence of the definition of “business premises” requiring the land to have been used “predominantly” as business premises is that the Commissioner considers this exclusion applies on an all or nothing basis. Therefore, if the land is predominantly used as business premises, all of the land is excluded from the meaning of residential land. If the land is not used predominantly as business premises, then the exclusion does not apply, and all of the land is residential land and subject to the bright-line test. QB 19/13 contains the following flowchart and a number of examples, including the following, to explain how the exclusion works:  Example 9: Business premises exclusion not relevant as requirements to be “residential land” not met  On 1 August 2018, Raj, a dentist, purchases a property with a villa on it. The previous owner had lived in the villa for many years. Raj fits the villa out as a dentist surgery and carries on his dentistry business from there. Three years later, Raj sells his dentistry practice and the villa and moves overseas. During the time Raj owned the villa, nobody lived in it, and Raj did not have an arrangement to erect a dwelling on the property. Shortly after selling the villa, Raj hears about the bright-line test and asks his lawyer, Ruby, whether the sale might be subject to tax since the villa was previously a residential home. Ruby explains that the sale of the villa is not subject to the bright-line test because the property does not meet the definition of “residential land”. This is because: • the property did not have a dwelling on it • Raj did not have an arrangement to erect a dwelling on the property, and • the property was not “bare land” that may be used for erecting a dwelling under the relevant operative district plan. Ruby explains that although the villa might look like a dwelling, it was fitted out as a dentist surgery, not as a place of residence or abode. Ruby also notes there is a business premises exclusion to the definition of “residential land”, but in Raj’s case, this exclusion is not relevant because the property did not fall within the requirements to potentially be “residential land” in the first place.  Example 10: Land with business premises and stand-alone residence excluded from bright-line as predominantly business premises Wayne buys a property that has a three-bedroom house and large stand-alone workshop on it. Wayne lives in the house with his family and operates a surfboard-building business from the workshop. Wayne’s workshop and associated land make up 60% of the total land area of the property and has been his business premises since he purchased the property. Because the property has a dwelling on it (the house), the property meets the initial definition of “residential land”. Wayne sells the property within the bright-line period. Although the property meets the initial part of the definition of “residential land”, it subsequently falls outside the definition because the land is predominantly used as business premises. This means the sale of the property is not caught by the bright-line test. If the land was not predominantly used as business premises, it is still possible that the property sale would nonetheless be excluded from the bright-line test under the “main home” exclusion (s CB 16A). For details on how the “main home” exclusion in s CB 16A applies, see “QB 18/16: Income tax — bright-line test — main home exclusion — sale of subdivided section”. However, if the property was owned by Wayne’s family trust, the “main home” exclusion would only be available if the principal settlor of the trust does not have a main home (eg if Wayne’s late father settled the trust), or if the principal settlor does have a main home, then that main home is the one being sold (eg if Wayne settled the trust and lives in the house as a beneficiary of the trust). In this context, the principal settlor is the settlor whose settlements on the trust are the greatest, or equal greatest, by market value.  Farmland “Farmland” is defined as land that: ▪ is being worked in the farming or agricultural business of the land’s owner, or ▪ because of its area and nature is capable of being worked as a farming or agricultural business. Determining whether there is a farming or agricultural business on the land requires looking at the same factors that determine whether there is a business under general tax law. This requires looking at the nature of the activities carried on and the intention of the taxpayer in undertaking these activities. Determining whether land is capable of being worked requires looking at the capability of the land at the time of disposal. Land that requires significant investment or modification to be used as a farming business would not qualify. Example 11: Land that because of its area is not capable of being used as farmland Marama purchases a lifestyle block with a house and a small area of farmland. A small number of sheep are kept on the land to keep the grass down. The land is not “farmland” as the land is not being worked as a farming business nor is it capable of being worked as a farming business. It is a hobby farm rather than a genuine farming business. If the area of farmland was larger and capable of being used for farming purposes, it would likely be “farmland”.  Example 12: Land that because of its nature is not capable of being used as farmland Tina owns a 50-hectare plot of land. The land is covered in gorse. The land is not “farmland” because it is not currently capable of being used for farming purposes. Examples taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 83.  Inheritance  When a person dies, their property may be sold or transferred to a beneficiary, who may subsequently sell the property. These transfers and disposals will not be subject to tax under the bright-line test. See ¶7-405. Relationship property When a relationship breaks down, property may be transferred between the spouses or partners. The property may then subsequently be sold. Transfers of property under a relationship property agreement are excluded from the bright-line test. However, any subsequent sale of the transferred property will be subject to the bright-line test. See ¶7440. Resident’s restricted amalgamation Under the bright-line test there is rollover relief for amalgamations. This rollover relief extends the existing rollover relief for amalgamations to property that is revenue account property of an amalgamating company due to the application of the new bright-line test. See ¶20-108. Deductibility of expenditure Taxpayers are allowed deductions for property subject to the bright-line test according to ordinary tax rules. See ¶7-360 to ¶7-371. Losses Losses from deductions that are claimable solely against bright-line income (bright-line deductions) are ring-fenced so that they may only be used to offset taxable gains arising under the land sale rules. The amount of bright-line deductions allowed in any income year is limited to the amount of bright-line income and net land income for that year. Net land income is the amount of net income for the year as if the person’s only income they derived was from the disposal of land under ss CB 6 to CB 14. Any excess deductions not allocated to the income year will be treated as the cost of revenue account property and carried forward to the next income year. However, any excess deductions will not be able to be carried forward if the general continuity requirements for carrying forward tax losses are not satisfied.  Example 13: Ring-fenced loss In June 2017 Zac sells residential land that is taxable solely due to the bright-line test. Zac acquired the land for $600,000 and sold it for $540,000. For the 2017–18 income year, Zac also earned $80,000 in salary. The $60,000 loss for the sale of residential land is ring-fenced so that it may only be used to offset income from other land sales. Zac cannot use the $60,000 loss to offset his income from salary and wages. In August 2019 Zac sells land that he purchased with an intention of resale. Zac made a gain of $100,000 from the sale. Zac may offset his previous $60,000 loss against the $100,000 gain. As a result, Zac only has to pay tax on $40,000 of the gain in the 2019–20 income year. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 88.  Transfers to associated persons Where a person derives income under the bright-line test from the transfer of property to an associated person, the person’s deduction for expenditure or loss on the disposal of the land is capped at the amount of income derived. However, to avoid genuine losses being denied permanently, the associate may increase the cost base of the land by the amount of the denied deduction. Example 14: Transfer to associate  Steve’s deductions are capped at $400,000 for the transfer on 1 January 2017. He cannot claim the $100,000 loss for the year. When Tara sells the land on 1 June 2018, she can deduct $500,000. This is made up of the $400,000 cost of acquisition as well as the $100,000 of denied deductions. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 89.  Note that these ring-fencing rules were originally contained in former ss DB 18A and DB 18AB when the legislation was first introduced. However, following the introduction of ring-fencing rules in subpart EL  for other residential land from 1 April 2019, these sections were repealed and replaced by s EL 20. Anti-avoidance rules for land-rich companies and trusts The use of land-rich companies and trusts to circumvent the bright-line test is addressed through anti-avoidance rules that deem a disposal subject to the bright-line test to have occurred when companies and trust are used to defeat the intent and application of the test. For these purposes, a land-rich company or trust is one where residential land owned directly or indirectly makes up 50% or more, by market value, of the assets of the company or trust. Land-rich companies The anti-avoidance rule in s GB 52 for land-rich companies applies when the following requirements are met: ▪ The company is a land-rich company. ▪ 50% or more of the shares in the company, by market value, are disposed of within a 12-month period. ▪ Some of the company’s residential land was acquired within five years (two years for land acquired before 29 March 2018) of the disposal of the shares. ▪ The disposal of the shares had a purpose or effect of defeating the intent and application of the bright-line test. When the requirements are met the land-rich company is treated as disposing of residential land that it acquired within five years (two years for land acquired before 29 March 2018) of the share disposal to the shareholder at cost. The amount of residential land and the price are at the cost proportional to the shareholding of the relevant shareholder. The shareholder is then treated as immediately disposing of the residential land back to the company at market value. Example 15: Land-rich company  X co will be treated as disposing of 50% of the residential land to Steve for $250,000. Steve will then be treated as disposing of the residential land back to the company for $300,000. As a result, Steve will have to pay income tax on the $50,000 gain from the deemed sale. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 89.  Land-rich trusts In the case of a land-rich trust, s GB 53 deems a trustee to have disposed of residential land at market value when any of the following changes are made with a purpose or effect of defeating the intent and application of the bright-line test: ▪ a change in the trust deed of a trust ▪ a decision-maker under the trust deed changes, or ▪ an arrangement under the trust changes. Law: IT07 ss CB 6A, CB 16A, EL 20, FB 3A, FC 9, GB 52, GB 53, YA 1  ¶7-055 Income from disposal of land — business relating to land The income of a person (person A) includes an amount derived from the disposal of land by person A where any one of the following applies: ▪ at the time of acquisition of the land: □ person A or an associated person carried on a business of dealing in land, and □ person A acquired the land for the purpose of the business (see ¶7-057), or  ▪ at the time of acquisition of the land: □ person A or an associated person carried on a business of developing or dividing land into lots, and □ person A acquired the land for the purpose of the business (see ¶7-059), or ▪ at the time of acquisition of the land: □ person A or an associated person carried on a business of erecting buildings □ person A acquired the land for the purpose of the business, and □ person A or the associate made improvements to the land, before or after its acquisition, that are of more than a minor nature (see ¶7-061). There are additional provisions that apply to a dealer, developer or builder. These provisions address the position of other land that had not been acquired for the purpose of any dealing, developing or building business by a person conducting one of those businesses. The land may give rise to assessable income if it is sold within 10 years. See further at ¶7-065 (dealer), ¶7-085 (developer) and ¶7-095 (builder). There are exclusions for land that is residential land and business premises. See further at ¶7-211 and ¶7-250, respectively. Law: IT07 s CB 7  ¶7-057 Income from disposal of land — business of dealing in land Under s CB 7(1)(a), the income of a person includes an amount derived from the disposal of land if, at the time of acquisition of the land, the person (or an associated person) carried on a business of dealing in land and the person acquired the land for the purpose of the business. Whether a person is a land dealer is a question of fact to be decided in light of the surrounding circumstances, including the number and  frequency of land transactions that have been entered into by the taxpayer. The test of whether a person is a dealer in land is usually taken as follows: It is to be noted that it must be a business of dealing. “Dealing” connotes buying and selling or exchanging land. To constitute a business of dealing where a person does not hold himself out as carrying on such business, generally speaking, the law requires a reasonable frequency of transactions or some continuity of effort in respect of the buying, selling or exchanging of land. Even where there are a number of transactions concerning land, they may well have some other explanation. The sales and purchases may be entirely for personal reasons. They may constitute a form of investment or change of investment with the object of getting a return from the property in preference to other forms of investment of money. It is a question of fact or inference from fact in each case. Sometimes it is difficult to draw the dividing line, and other times it is clear that the case falls on one side or the other. Each case must be decided on its own facts. See Bates v C of IR (1955) 11 ATD 96 at 102. See also Williams Property Developments Ltd v C of IR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,537, where this statement was approved. Example 1: A real estate agent is not regarded as being a land dealer merely because of his or her work as an agent. An investor is not necessarily a land dealer when selling property to obtain a better investment. See Case D30 (1980) 4 NZTC 60,654.  Example 2: The concept of “dealing” requires the subject-matter of the dealer’s business to be bought and sold substantially in the same condition. The business of dealing in land did not, therefore, cover the situation in which land was bought for the purpose of the erection and sale of houses. See Hornby Leaseholds Ltd v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,736 and also Henderson v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,279 (a subdivision of one single block of land).  Example 3:  TP Ltd was involved principally in erecting buildings such as schools and hospitals, but it had no pattern in dealing in domestic property. TP company built two houses on property acquired seven years earlier for accommodation for long-term employees. These houses were sold 35 years later. The Taxation Review Authority held that there was sufficient connection between the business of the taxpayer and the erecting of domestic dwellings for the activity in question to constitute a part of that business. See Case L65 (1989) 11 NZTC 1,381.  Law: IT07 s CB 7(1)(a)  ¶7-059 Income from disposal of land — business of developing or dividing land Under s CB 7(1)(b), the income of a person includes an amount derived from the disposal of land if, at the time of acquisition of the land, the person (or an associated person) carried on a business of developing or dividing land into lots and the person acquired the land for the purpose of the business. The provisions on gains derived from a business of developing or dividing land into lots overcome the decision in Henderson v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,279. In that case, the High Court held that a business of dealing in land does not encompass the building on or the developing of land. For an activity to constitute dealing, the commodity in which a dealer trades must be bought and sold in substantially the same condition. For the developer provisions to apply, it must be shown that the vendor was in the business of developing or dividing land into lots when they acquired the land. A person carrying on a business that is not one of land development or division at the time of acquisition is not subject to the developer provisions. Example: A profit made by an accountant when he sold his interest in a commercial property was not subject to the developer provisions, because he was not in the business of developing or subdividing land when he acquired his interest. While his partnership had started a building project that required division and development work, that work did not constitute a separate business. It was preparatory to or part of its contemplated business activity of building, not subdividing or developing. See Case T25 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,160.  Law: IT07 s CB 7(1)(b)  ¶7-061 Income from disposal of land — business of erecting buildings The provisions concerning businesses that relate to land apply to the disposal of land where the vendor, or an associated person, carried on a business of erecting buildings when the land was acquired and the land was acquired for the purpose of that business. It must also be the case that the vendor or their associate has made improvements to the land. Those improvements may have been made before or after the person acquired the land, overcoming an arrangement where, for example, the builder or the associate may effect the improvements before acquiring and then on-selling the improved land. For this purpose, the notion of improvements is defined to mean improvements to land that are not minor and that are made by a person (or an associated person) erecting a building or otherwise. Example 1: Taxpayers carried on a building contracting business in partnership, and, in 1963, acquired a section in a residential area. It was used for several years for the storage of building materials, but, in 1973, the taxpayers decided to erect on it a block of own-yourown flats. The Taxation Review Authority held that the profit derived from sale of the section was assessable income. If the land was acquired for the purposes of a business of erecting buildings, any profit on sale is taxable irrespective of whether a part of those profits might have otherwise been regarded as a capital gain. See Case D11 (1979) 4 NZTC 60,485.  Example 2: A partnership that owned rental properties and subsequently resolved to realise those properties in order to erect four flats was found by the Taxation Review Authority to be in the business of building. However, the Commissioner could not rely on the builder provisions to assess a taxpayer associated with the syndicate in respect of the sale of a commercial property purchased at the time of association because the Commissioner had assessed the taxpayers on different grounds. The business of building was found to have commenced upon the start of work involving the demolition of the existing house, clearing the site, erecting fencing, connection of power and sewerage and paving of driveways. See Case T25 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,160.  It is irrelevant when the disposal takes place. If the land was originally acquired by the taxpayer for the purposes of his or her building business and improvements have been made to it, then any amount arising on subsequent sale is included in income. Example 3: A building company acquired bare land that the shareholders intended should become the site of their family residence. Those plans were never implemented, and the land was sold after 28 years of ownership. The Taxation Review Authority held that the land was not acquired to be applied in the course of the company’s building activities. See Case W23 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,238.  Example 4: A trust was found to be in the business of erecting dwellings in Case 5/2013 (2013) 26 NZTC ¶2-004. This is despite the fact that the trust did not maintain separate records, have any employees, register for GST or employ the services of an accountant. What was important was that the trust had carried out its building activities in an organised and coherent way and a considerable amount of time and financial commitment was involved. The trust was involved in arranging the purchase and related financing of the land, having plans drawn up, organising the building contracts, project managing the build and carrying out the last stages of the build. Although no profit was actually realised in the beginning, reasonable profits were made towards the end of the trust’s building activities.  Law: IT07 s CB 7(1)(c)  ¶7-065 Income from disposal of land — dealer’s other land An amount derived from the disposal of land is income if: ▪ the land was disposed of within 10 years of acquisition, and ▪ at the time the land was acquired, the person, or an associated person, carried on a business of dealing in land. It is not necessary that the land was acquired for the purpose of the dealing business. Conduct of the dealing business at the time of acquisition, and sale within 10 years, are sufficient to give rise to income upon sale of the land.  Where a person carries on the business of dealing or is associated with a person who carries on the business of dealing, extreme care needs to be taken in acquiring property for domestic or investment purposes. The associated persons test is applied at the time the land is acquired. See further at ¶7-430. There are exclusions for certain council-controlled organisations, Kāinga Ora-Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) and companies in the same wholly-owned group, and for certain residential land and business premises. See further at ¶7-209, ¶7-210, ¶7-211 and ¶7-250 respectively. The dealer’s other land may not give rise to income upon death or distribution to a beneficiary of the estate. See further at ¶7-400. Assessable income under s CB 9 may not arise if land has been disposed of to the Government under s 91, 103 or 104 of the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016 (before 19 April 2016, s 53(1), 54 or 55 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011). See ¶7-450. Law: IT07 s CB 9  ¶7-085 Income from disposal of land — developer’s other land An amount derived from the disposal of land is income if: ▪ the land was disposed of within 10 years of acquisition, and ▪ at the time the land was acquired, the vendor, or an associated person, carried on a business of developing land or dividing land into lots. It is not necessary that the land be acquired for the purpose of the developing or subdividing business. Conduct of the developing or subdividing business at the time of acquisition, and sale within 10 years, are sufficient to give rise to income upon sale. There are exclusions for certain council-controlled organisations, Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) and companies in the same wholly-owned group, and for certain residential land and business premises. See further at  ¶7-209, ¶7-210, ¶7-211 and ¶7-250 respectively. The developer’s other land may not give rise to income upon death or distribution to a beneficiary of the estate. See further at ¶7-400. Assessable income under s CB 10 may not arise if land has been disposed of to the Government under s 91, 103 or 104 of the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016 (before 19 April 2016, s 53(1), 54 or 55 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011). See ¶7-450. Law: IT07 s CB 10  ¶7-095 Income from disposal of land — builder’s other land Where improvements carried out on land are more than minor in nature, s CB 11 will apply to include as income an amount derived on disposal of the land by the following: ▪ Builders who, at the time the improvements began, were carrying on the business of erecting buildings, and, regardless whether the land was acquired for the purpose of that business, the land is disposed of within 10 years of completing the improvements. ▪ Persons who were associated with builders at the time the improvements were begun and the land is disposed of within 10 years of completing the improvement. It is irrelevant whether the person is a builder themselves or whether the land was acquired for the associated builder’s business. Where a person in the business of building acquires land and on-sells it without modification, the person will not be subject to tax under this section — that is, a genuine capital gain on private or investment property should not be taxed. However, a person in this situation would need to be aware of other taxing provisions that may apply. The notion of improvements is defined to mean improvements to land that are not minor (and that are made by a person or an associated person erecting a building or otherwise). In other words, the improvements must be able to be regarded as more than minor before any gain upon disposal of the land gives rise to income.  In January 2018, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 18/01, “Can a fit-out of an existing building be ‘improvements’ for the purposes of s CB 11?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 2, March 2018 at 7). The item concludes that the fit-out of an existing building can be improvements and if the building is later sold, the proceeds may be taxable under s CB 11. The item includes a number of examples. The 10-year period runs from the date of completion of the improvements rather than from the date of acquisition of the land. No account is taken of how long the owner has held the land, so a disposal 20 years after acquisition may still give rise to assessable income if the land is disposed of within 10 years of completing improvements. To be classified as “carrying on a business of erecting buildings” the business in question must be involved in most facets of a building business. Consequently, a person may be excluded from both ss CB 7(1)(c) and CB 11 if the business does not involve the erection of buildings. An employee of a building company, not carrying on the business, would appear not to be subject to ss CB 7(1)(c) and CB 11 unless that employee was associated with another person who carried on a building business. There are exclusions for certain council-controlled organisations, Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) and companies in the same wholly-owned group, and for certain residential land and business premises. See further at ¶7-209, ¶7-210, ¶7-211 and ¶7-250 respectively. The builder’s other land may not give rise to income upon death or distribution to a beneficiary of the estate. See further at ¶7-400. Assessable income under s CB 11 may not arise if land has been disposed of to the Government under s 91, 103 or 104 of the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016 (before 19 April 2016, s 53(1), 54 or 55 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011). See ¶7-450. Law: IT07 s CB 11  ¶7-115 Development or division begun within 10 years — s CB 12  Proceeds from the disposal of land may be subject to taxation under s CB 12 if the person has subdivided or developed the land within 10 years of acquisition. In particular, the disposal of land gives rise to income in the following circumstances: ▪ an undertaking or scheme is carried on (not necessarily as a business) ▪ the undertaking or scheme involves the development of the land or the division of the land into lots ▪ the person, or another person on their behalf, carries on the development or division work on or in relation to the land ▪ the development or division work is not minor ▪ the undertaking or scheme commenced within 10 years of acquisition of the land, and ▪ there is no application of an exclusion relating to: □ residential land: see ¶7-225 □ business premises: see ¶7-260 □ farmland: see ¶7-270, or □ investment land: see ¶7-290. A number of the expressions used in s CB 12 are very important in determining the scope and application of the section. These expressions are analysed further at ¶7-116–¶7-120. Law: IT07 s CB 12  ¶7-116 Meaning of “undertaking or scheme” The term “undertaking or scheme” as used in ss CB 12 and CB 13 is not defined in the Income Tax Act 2007. However, there are a number of judicial definitions. A “scheme” typically implies a plan or purpose  that is coherent and has some unity of conception. A scheme is a course of action devoted to a particular end. An “undertaking” is a project or enterprise organised and directed to an end result. See Lowe v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,006 and Investment and Merchant Finance Corporation Ltd v FC of T 70 ATC 4001. It would appear that not much activity needs to be present to constitute a plan or programme of action as an undertaking or scheme. Further, the undertaking or scheme must be carried on or carried out by the taxpayer or another person for them. See Case X9 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,123. Land development activities invariably need to be preceded by the obtaining of regulatory consents and supported by a significant financial investment. Those aspects will typically show whether there is an undertaking or scheme. Example: A scheme exists when there is a coherent plan of action for the development or division into lots of the relevant land. While the scheme does not have to be complete in all details, there must be sufficient identification of objectives before any following steps may be described as implementation of the scheme instead of its preparation. The date of commencement is when the first step is taken in carrying out the scheme. See Cross v C of IR (1987) 9 NZTC 6,101 (CA). See further at ¶7-117.  Question we’ve been asked In April 2015, Inland Revenue released Question we’ve been asked, QB 15/04: “Income tax — whether it is possible that the disposal of land that is part of an undertaking or scheme involving development or division will not give rise to income, even if no exclusion applies” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 4, May 2015 at 37). The Commissioner’s position is that if an undertaking or scheme involving development or division has been carried on (and meets the other criteria in s CB 12 or CB 13), the proceeds on disposal of all of the land will be taxable under the relevant provision unless an exclusion applies. However, the Commissioner will accept that s CB 12 or CB 13 does not apply to the disposal of any given part of the land if the taxpayer can provide satisfactory evidence that the undertaking or scheme was not carried on with a view to the disposal of that land. The item states that  the Commissioner would expect to see evidence that there had been some other demonstrable plan for the land in question. The item identifies the following as things that may be relevant to establish an undertaking or scheme was not carried on with a view to disposal of the land in question: ▪ the details of the development or subdivision plans, resource consent applications, etc ▪ any contracts or agreements entered into ▪ evidence as to the intended use of particular parts of the land ▪ whether the taxpayer apportioned costs relating to the development or division work between land they had a view to disposal of and land they claim they did not ▪ what ultimately happened to the land in question, and ▪ the reasons for the ultimate disposal of the land in question. The item emphasises that if an undertaking or scheme meeting the criteria in s CB 12 or CB 13 is carried on, it does not matter when the disposal of land occurs. The mere passage of time will not, without other supporting evidence, necessarily be sufficient to show that the undertaking or scheme was not carried on with a view to the disposal of the land in question. In addition, it is only necessary that an undertaking or scheme meeting the relevant criteria has been carried on, it does not need to have been carried out (ie brought to fruition). If an undertaking or scheme meeting the relevant criteria was carried on but was subsequently abandoned, the ultimate disposal of the land will still be caught by the relevant provision unless an exclusion applies or the taxpayer can establish that the undertaking or scheme was not carried on with a view to disposal of the land in question. Correction to IG0010 QB 15/04 specifically qualified an earlier interpretation guideline IG0010: “Work of a minor nature” in one respect. IG0010 was regarded as incorrect in stating that when any of the lots resulting from a boundary adjustment are disposed of, any amount derived on the  disposition would necessarily be income under s CB 12. IG0010 was replaced by interpretation statement IS 20/08, “Income tax – when is development or division work ‘minor’?” in August 2020 (see ¶7-120). IS 20/08 reflects the approach adopted in QB 15/04. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13  ¶7-117 Commencement of the undertaking or scheme The time of commencement is relevant in applying the 10-year rule under s CB 12. It is also relevant in relation to calculating any amount derived under s CB 13 because it is only the amount derived from the commencement of the scheme that is regarded as income. Section CB 12 applies if a scheme or undertaking