 partner. QB 19/01 In March 2019, Inland Revenue released QB 19/01, “What are the requirements for claiming tax deductions for payments to family members for services?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 149). The item states that to claim a tax deduction for payments to family members for services: ▪ the family member must provide services to your business ▪ the amount paid must not be excessive, and ▪ if the family member is your spouse or partner, you must have the Commissioner’s prior approval for a deduction unless you run your business through a company. The requirements of QB 19/01 are discussed further at ¶10-900. Law: IT07 ss DB 57, DC 5  ¶27-040 Wages paid by farmer to children A farmer employing his or her children should ensure that the following general requirements are met: ▪ the services must actually be provided by the children, and ▪ the wage paid must not be excessive.  The Commissioner has set out the requirements for claiming tax deductions for payments to family members in QB 19/01, “What are the requirements for claiming tax deductions for payments to family members for services?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 149). With effect from the 2012–13 income year a limited tax exemption applies for income of less than $2,340 earned by children that is not a PAYE income payment from which their employer is required to withhold tax, resident or non-resident passive income, excluded income or income that is exempt under another provision. See ¶3326 and ¶11-035. Therefore, PAYE deductions should be made from wages paid to children in the same way as to any other farm employee. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes to add beneficiary income to the above list of types of income excluded from the tax exemption. The amendment is intended to apply retrospectively from the 2012–13 income year, the original application date of the exemption provision. However, a savings provision will apply for taxpayers who took a tax position relying on the current law in a return filed before the date the Bill was introduced. Wages paid to children should be reasonable. Section GB 23 provides the Commissioner with broad powers to reallocate income and losses between parties where she considers that excessive salary or wages have been paid. See also “Question We’ve Been Asked” QB 14/09: “Income Tax — Meaning of ‘Excessive Remuneration’ and ‘Excessive Profits or Losses’ Paid or Allocated to Relatives, Partners, Shareholders or Directors” that discusses the application of s GB 23 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 9, October 2014 at 22). Law: IT07 s CW 55BB  ¶27-045 Domestic employees employed in farmer’s household  As a general rule, wages paid to a domestic employee employed in a farmer’s household are regarded as private expenditure and are not deductible. However, some wages may be claimed as a deduction if the domestic employee is required to perform both farm work and domestic duties about the farmer’s household. The amount of the deduction is equal to that portion of the wages that is attributable to farm duties. The cost of any rations supplied should be apportioned in the same manner and a deduction claimed for that portion attributable to employment in farm duties. A domestic employee who is employed on a full-time basis should be dealt with, for tax purposes, in the same manner as other farm employees. If employment is for a short period or on a part-time basis, the employee may be regarded as a private domestic worker and the farmer is not then required to make PAYE deductions. It is the employee who is responsible for accounting to Inland Revenue for the tax deductions in that case. See ¶3-306. For a discussion of casual agricultural employees, see ¶3-190. Law: IT07 s RD 16  ¶27-060 Accident compensation levies and health and safety levy for farmers In most instances, a farmer is treated as self-employed for accident compensation purposes. This means that, each year, the farmer must pay the ACC levies payable by self-employed persons in addition to the separate health and safety levy imposed on selfemployed persons. A self-employed farmer or a farmer who is a shareholder employee of a company can choose to receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of compensation from the ACC. See ¶31-055. In respect of the farmer’s employees, the farmer must deduct ACC levies from employees’ wages (paid as part of the PAYE deduction) (see ¶31-015).  ¶27-061 GST issues for farmers  Sale and purchase of a farm General issues associated with the sale and purchase of a farm (including going concern issues) are discussed at ¶27-011. Sale of farm including farmhouse Where the sale of a farm includes a principal place of residence, the sale comprises two separate supplies: the supply of the farmland, and the supply of the house and its grounds. (See also ¶32-555.) Compulsory zero-rating provisions apply to supplies wholly or partly consisting of land. See ¶32-505. Under the compulsory zero-rating provisions rules a supply of land will be zero-rated if: ▪ the supply is made on or after 1 April 2011 ▪ both the vendor and purchaser are registered for GST ▪ the purchaser acquires the goods with the intention of using them for making taxable supplies, and ▪ the supply is not a supply of land intended to be used as a principal place of residence of the recipient of the supply or a relative of the recipient. Example 1: Jamie agrees to purchase farmland and a farmhouse for $1.1m plus GST, if any. The registered valuation states that the farmland is worth $980,000 and the farmhouse is worth $120,000. The vendor has been using the farmhouse, since purchase in September 1994, as his principal place of residence. Where a farmhouse, which has been used as a principal place of residence, is included in a larger supply of real property, the supply of the farmhouse will be treated separately to the balance of the real property included in the sale. This is the case regardless of whether GST was previously claimed on the purchase. In a written statement provided to the vendor, Jamie indicates that she is GSTregistered and that she intends to use the farmhouse as her principal place of residence. Because the vendor claimed GST on the purchase of the farmhouse (as sometimes happened pre-1995), the supply of the farmhouse and surrounding curtilage will be a taxable supply. The supply of the farmhouse cannot be zero-rated, as the farmhouse  is not being acquired with the intention of making taxable supplies. Jamie intends to use it for a private purpose. Accordingly, GST will be payable on the supply of the farmhouse at the standard rate of 15%. The supply of the balance of the farm, ie the land portion, can be zero-rated under the compulsory zero-rating rules provided the criteria stated above are satisfied. As the farmhouse is not included in the supply of the balance of the farm, the use of that property (as a primary place of residence) will not impact the ability to zero-rate the supply. Before settlement the vendor issues a tax invoice on the basis that GST of $18,000 is chargeable in respect of the supply of the farmhouse. Since the vendor previously claimed an input tax credit in respect of the farmhouse and supply of the farmhouse is standard rated under this transaction, the vendor must account for the output tax of $18,000. This may create a problem for Jamie because if the sale and purchase agreement states that the price is “plus GST (if any)” the vendor is able to recover his output tax liability from Jamie. However, Jamie will not be able to claim the GST on that part of the purchase because the farmhouse is not being acquired with the intention of making taxable supplies. There is no output tax liability under s 20(3J) unless Jamie is intending (at the time of acquisition) to use the balance of the farm property partly for non-taxable purposes, eg where a converted shed is intended to be used as the principal place of residence for a farm employee.  Home kill Livestock taken for home kill is treated as a deemed sale for both income tax and GST purposes and must be accounted for accordingly. Note that QB 14/01: “Income tax — adjustments for trading stock (including raw materials) taken for own use or consumption” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 3, April 2014 at 73) considers the situation where trading stock is taken for a taxpayer’s own use or consumption and concludes that a taxpayer is required to account for any items of trading stock taken for own use or consumption at the market value of the trading stock. See further at ¶9-087. Home office expenses A farmer carrying out the administrative and/or management functions of his or her farming operation from home is entitled to an input tax credit on a proportion of the expenses incurred. Rates, insurance, telephone rental and toll calls are common “home office”  expenses for which GST can be claimed. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 5, March 1992 at 2. Partnership issues For GST registration purposes, a partnership is treated as an entity distinct from its members. See ¶23-110. One of the consequences of registration is that the partnership is required to account for GST on distributions of partnership assets. Difficulties may arise where the distinction between those assets owned by the partnership and those owned by individual members becomes blurred. Example 2: A GST-registered husband and wife partnership operated its farming activity on two blocks of land each owned separately by a partner. The partnership later purchased the land from the partners and claimed an input tax deduction. The partners did not account for GST, being unregistered vendors. Although the partnership agreement did not make it clear whether the land was intended to be a partnership asset, the land was used by the partnership, it was recorded in the accounts and the partnership claimed income tax deductions on rates and interest paid in respect of the land. The Commissioner argued that s 57(2) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 deemed the sale of the land by the husband and wife to the partnership to be a supply made by the partnership and not the individual partners. If this approach were accepted the GST outcome would be neutral (output tax would equal the input tax deduction). However, this approach was rejected by the Taxation Review Authority. See Case S84 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,526. See also Case S83 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,515. For a contrary view, see Case R11 (1994) 16 NZTC 6,062.  Subsequent decisions have analysed more closely the GST treatment for co-owners of land and the impact of s 57. In Case U19 (1999) 19 NZTC 9,186, the Taxation Review Authority held that the co-owners of a farm were an unincorporated body of persons for GST purposes and were liable to be registered. The three owners (a husband and wife and their family trust) were also the three partners in the partnership that ran the farm. The Authority, drawing from the reasoning in Case P70 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,469, held that there was a degree of “comity or association between the landowners which transcended the fact that they were joint owners of the land”. They structured their relationship with each other in such a way that they bound themselves to deal collectively with the land. Case U19 was  cited with approval by the High Court in Newman v C of IR, Holdsworth v C of IR, Hair v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,666. Deemed registration There may be instances where a vendor, although not GSTregistered at the time of sale, may be liable to be registered for GST purposes. In Case R29 (1994) 16 NZTC 6,155, a family trust that was not registered for GST sold a farm to an associated person. The Taxation Review Authority found that the rental for farmland leased from the trust included the payment of rates. When the rates were added to the farm rental, the total value of supplies exceeded the threshold for GST registration. The trust was, therefore, liable to be registered for GST and had to account for output tax on the sale. The Authority’s decision has, in the most part, been upheld by the High Court in The Trustee, Executors and Agency Company New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,076. See also Case R27 (1994) 16 NZTC 6,148. Persons who own land jointly (who, when considered separately, would not exceed the threshold for GST registration) may be treated as an “unincorporated body” for GST purposes and could push the land-owning entity beyond the threshold for GST registration. Example 3: A farming couple and their family trust owned a farm. A partnership (made up of the couple and the trust) ran the farming operation. The owners argued that they acted as individuals, rather than collectively, in making the farm available for the partnership’s use. No terms or conditions existed to regulate their relationship with one another as co-owners. The Taxation Review Authority rejected this, ruling that the co-owners were an unincorporated body that was liable to be GST-registered. See Case U19 (1999) 19 NZTC 9,186.  See also Alastair McKenzie GST — A Practical Guide (10th ed, CCH, Auckland, 2017) at ¶601, ¶602. Law: GST ss 5(15), (16), 11(1)(mb), 57  INCOME EQUALISATION SCHEMES  ¶27-065 Income equalisation schemes There are currently two income equalisation schemes. A third, the adverse event income equalisation scheme, was repealed with effect for income years commencing after 18 March 2019 (see ¶27-120). The most common is the main income equalisation scheme. The main scheme enables an eligible person to level out the person’s income from year to year by permitting income equalisation deposits with the Commissioner and allowing a deduction for the amounts so deposited. Deposits are included in the person’s income when withdrawn. Those persons eligible to take advantage of the main income equalisation scheme are: ▪ a person carrying on a farming or agricultural business (including most primary production types of activities, with the exception of stock dealers) ▪ a person carrying on a fishing business, including rock oyster, mussel and freshwater fish farming (a person engaged only in buying and selling fish or fish products is not in the business of fishing), and ▪ an individual person who derives income from forestry, ie from the disposal of standing, cut, or fallen timber in its natural state grown on land owned by the person in New Zealand or the disposal of the rights to cut or remove such timber, and including permanent forestry income (prior to 23 June 2020, Permanent Forest Sink Initiatives (PFSI) forestry income). A trustee who is carrying on a business of farming or fishing, or who derives income from forestry, may take advantage of the scheme in relation to his or her income as a trustee. In addition to the main income equalisation scheme (outlined at ¶27070–¶27-080), there is a limited income equalisation scheme for a forestry company earning income from thinning operations. See ¶27085.  Income equalisation deposits are dealt with as public money in accordance with the Public Finance Act 1989. Every amount received by the Commissioner from a person is paid into a Crown Bank Account, known as the Income Equalisation Reserve Account. Law: IT07 ss EH 1–EH 3, EH 34, EH 36  ¶27-070 Main income equalisation scheme — deposits A deposit under the main income equalisation scheme may be made by an eligible person at any time during the relevant tax year. Ordinarily, the deposit is regarded as being made in respect of the tax year in which it is made and is consequently deductible in that year. The legislation specifies that a deposit may be made under the scheme in a tax year in respect of the preceding tax year if the person so elects, and if the payment is made within the specified period after the end of the preceding tax year. The specified period is the shorter of the period of six months after the end of the tax year and the period from the end of the tax year to the date one month after the due date for furnishing the return. Where a person wishes to make a deposit in respect of the previous year but fails to make it within the specified period after the end of that year, the Commissioner may allow further time for the making of an election to deposit in respect of the earlier year. The Commissioner has issued a standard practice statement that effectively gives a blanket extension of the deadlines outlined above — see “Deposits made outside the specified period” below. Minimum and maximum deposit amounts The maximum deposit that can be deposited in the income equalisation scheme for any tax year is as follows: ▪ in the case of income from forestry, an amount equal to the income from forestry derived by the person in that year ▪ in the case of income from fishing, an amount equal to the income from fishing derived by the person in that year, and  ▪ in the case of a farmer: □ an amount equal to the net income that the farmer would have in the year if the farmer derived income only from the farming or agricultural business in the tax year, and □ for income years commencing before 19 March 2019, the farmer did not make an adverse event deposit (see ¶27120) in the same tax year. The minimum amount which may be deposited at one time is $200, unless that amount takes the total deposits for the year over the main maximum deposit for that year, in which case the minimum deposit is the amount required to take the total up to the year’s main maximum deposit. The Commissioner automatically refunds deposits made in excess of the maximum amount as soon as practicable after the refund is calculated. Main income equalisation account Every deposit a person makes with the Commissioner must be entered into an income equalisation account kept by the Commissioner in the person’s name (the person’s main income equalisation account). Only deposits made by the person under the scheme, and interest allowed on those deposits, are credited to such an account. See s EH 5. Deduction If a person makes deposits under the main income equalisation scheme in respect of a tax year, a deduction of the amount of those deposits is allowed in the calculation of the person’s net income for that year. If the person has made deposits in excess of the maximum — 100% of income — for the year, the deduction is limited to that maximum. Deposits made outside the specified period The Commissioner has released standard practice statement SPS 19/03, “Income equalisation deposits and refunds” (Tax Information  Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 34), which applies from 4 April 2019 and replaces SPS 17/01. SPS 19/03 is essentially a repeat of SPS 17/01, but it has been reworded to recognise the repeal of the adverse event income equalisation scheme and to fix some incorrect section references. SPS 19/03 sets out the Commissioner’s practice in relation to the statutory powers to accept income equalisation deposits for a tax year outside the specified period. Note that the statement only applies to the main income equalisation scheme and the thinning operations income equalisation scheme. It does not apply to the adverse event income equalisation scheme. Briefly, the statement provides as follows: ▪ Beyond the specified period for a tax year, the Commissioner will allow a person to make a late deposit for that accounting year if the deposit is made by the earlier of: □ one month from the date of filing the return of income for an accounting year, or □ one month from the date that the relevant return of income is due to be filed — this includes any extension of time arrangements agreed to by Inland Revenue (IR). ▪ The Commissioner will consider, on a case-by-case basis, requests to allow a late deposit for the nominated accounting year, taking into account the taxpayer’s particular circumstances. ▪ Late deposits not accepted by the Commissioner as applying to the nominated accounting year may still be accepted by the Commissioner and applied to the accounting year in which the deposits are made. The person will be contacted and asked whether the deposit is still to be made or the money refunded. ▪ A deduction will be allowed for the accounting year in which the deposit is deemed to have been made and once the deposit is physically received by IR.  One example where the Commissioner has exercised the income equalisation discretion to accept late deposits was for flood affected farmers in Northland. In July 2014, the Commissioner announced that late deposits for the 2014 year could be made up until 30 April 2015, regardless of when the 2014 return was due or filed. Another example was for orchardists in the Nelson area affected by hailstorms. In November 2014, the Commissioner announced late deposits could be made up to 31 January 2015 for the 2014 tax year if returns were filed by 30 November 2014. Impact of the COVID-19 virus Inland Revenue stated that, for farmers, fishers and growers whose current or future income would be significantly affected by the impact of the COVID-19 virus, late deposits to the income equalisation scheme would be allowed for the 2019 tax year up to 30 June 2020, regardless of when the 2019 tax return was filed or what the due date was for filing the tax return. The quantum of the deposit was limited to the net income from agricultural activities for the 2018–19 tax year. See also ¶27-075 in relation to refunds. Law: IT07 ss DQ 1, EH 4, EH 5, EH 7, EH 8, EH 35, EH 36  ¶27-075 Main income equalisation scheme — refunds and tax credits A person with deposits in a main income equalisation account may apply to Inland Revenue (IR) for a refund of the whole or any part of those deposits. As a general rule, no refunds are available for amounts that have been deposited for less than 12 months before the date of the application for the refund. Every refund made from the main income equalisation account is deemed to have been made from the person’s reserve deposits in the order in which those deposits were made. Also, there is a minimum refund amount of $200 or the balance in the main income equalisation account, whichever is the smaller. With effect from 23 July 2020, the refund of an amount in an income equalisation account must be made by direct credit to a nominated  bank account, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that paying by direct credit would result in undue hardship to the person or is not practicable. Early refund for development or recovery A refund of amounts deposited for six months or more may be made if the refund is required to enable the person to undertake planned development or maintenance work or to purchase livestock (other than livestock replacing livestock disposed of or lost as a result of a self-assessed adverse event). A refund of amounts deposited for less than six months may be made if the refund is required to enable the person to purchase replacement livestock as the result of a self-assessed adverse event (see ¶27-120). It may also be made to prevent the person suffering serious hardship or for any other reason at the Commissioner’s discretion. Refund in other circumstances The other circumstances in which the Commissioner makes a refund from a main income equalisation account are: ▪ when the refund is from a deposit in excess of the allowable maximum for the year ▪ after the expiration of five years, whether the person has applied for a refund or not ▪ on application, if the deposit has been in the account for at least one year ▪ on the retirement of a farmer or fisher ▪ on the death of an individual ▪ on the bankruptcy of an individual, and ▪ on the liquidation of a company.  Refund is income A refund on the application of the person is ordinarily deemed to have been made in respect of the year in which the application for the refund is received by IR. The amount of the refund is therefore usually deemed to be income derived by the person in the year in which the application for the refund is received, unless the person is entitled to elect otherwise, and does so elect. A refund made on application of the person may be deemed to be income of the person in the year preceding that in which the application was made, if the application is received by IR within the specified period after the end of that preceding year, and the person so elects in the person’s application. The specified period is the shorter of the period of six months immediately following the end of the year or the period from the end of the year to one month after the date by which the person is required to furnish a return for that year. See below for the Commissioner’s policy on refund requests received outside the specified period. A refund of an amount deposited for five years is income derived by the person in the income year in which the refund is made. Where refunds result from death, bankruptcy or liquidation, the income is derived by the person immediately before the relevant event. A refund on retirement is income derived by the person in the income year in which they retire. In the case of a refund on retirement or death, an election can be made to allocate the income to an earlier year. In the case of a refund on death of a person, an election may also be made to allocate the income to a later year. Attributing a refund to the previous year may assist a person in spreading income more evenly, or in obtaining a refund in a year when the person may later want to make a deposit for that year (which may be done if the refund is allocated to the preceding year). A refund of an excess deposit under s EH 8 is excluded income of the person. Tax credit  If a person receives a refund from a main income equalisation account, the amount of the refund is added to the person’s income for the appropriate year, and tax for the year is calculated accordingly. If the tax attributable to the refund exceeds the tax saving that the person obtained previously in respect of the deposit of the amount represented by the refund, there is provision for a tax credit in the year in which the refund is assessed, the tax credit being the amount by which the extra tax exceeds the tax saving. Refund applications made outside the specified period The Commissioner has released standard practice statement SPS 19/03, “Income equalisation deposits and refunds” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 34), which applies from 4 April 2019 and replaces SPS 17/01. SPS 19/03 is essentially a repeat of SPS 17/01, but it has been reworded to recognise the repeal of the adverse event income equalisation scheme and to fix some incorrect section references. SPS 19/03 sets out the Commissioner’s practice in relation to the statutory powers to accept refund applications for a tax year outside the specified period. The statement does not apply to refunds made on the retirement, death or bankruptcy of a person, or on a company liquidation, and also does not apply to the adverse income equalisation scheme. Briefly, in relation to refunds outside the specified period, the statement provides as follows: ▪ A late application for a refund from the income equalisation scheme for an accounting year will be accepted by the Commissioner if the application is made by the earlier of: □ one month from the date that the return of income for an accounting year is filed, or □ one month from the date that the return is due to be filed — this includes any extension of time arrangement agreed to by IR. ▪ The Commissioner will consider, on a case-by-case basis, late applications for a refund for a requested accounting year, taking  into account the taxpayer’s particular circumstances. ▪ Late applications for refunds not accepted by the Commissioner as applying to the elected accounting year may still be accepted by the Commissioner and applied to the accounting year in which the applications are made. In this case, the person will be contacted and asked if the application is to be continued with. ▪ A refund deemed to be made from an elected accounting year is income to the person for that year. The statement also briefly discusses the criteria for allowing an early refund of an amount within the 12-month period. Impact of the COVID-19 virus Inland Revenue has stated that farmers, fishers and growers materially affected by the impact of the COVID-19 virus will be permitted to make early refunds from their income equalisation scheme. In this case, materially affected means that the farmer, fisher or grower is in financial difficulty through the incurring of significant additional expenditure or through a significant decrease in revenue as a result of the impact of COVID-19. See also ¶27-065 in relation to deposits. Transfer of refund A person may apply to have a refund of a deposit made to the income equalisation account transferred to the person’s tax account. The application should clearly state the following: ▪ the deposit (amount and deposit date) to be transferred ▪ the tax account to which it is to be transferred ▪ what amount should be transferred and what amount should be refunded, and ▪ what should happen to any interest. The transfer request should be sent to:  Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045. Law: IT07 ss CB 27, CX 51, EH 8–EH 33, EH 36; TAA s 184A  ¶27-080 Main income equalisation scheme — interest on deposits Interest is receivable on deposits in a main income equalisation account at the rate of 3% pa. However, if the deposit is withdrawn within 12 months, no interest will be received. Interest on the amount of each deposit is calculated with daily rests from the date of acknowledgment of receipt of the deposit, until the date when the deposit is refunded. Accrued interest is added to the account at 31 March each year, or on the earlier withdrawal of the deposit to which it relates. Interest once credited forms part of the deposit in respect of which it has been allowed for the purpose of calculating further interest, and for the purpose of determining when it may or shall be refunded to the person. However, the interest is not taken into account for the purpose of calculating any deduction for deposits made to the account. When any interest is included in any refund under the scheme, that interest is included with the refund as part of the income of the person for the income year to which the deposit is allocated. See Case E86 (1982) 5 NZTC 59,449. Resident withholding tax Inland Revenue (IR) set out the following policy on the treatment of resident withholding tax with regard to interest on income equalisation accounts in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 2, No 4, November 1990 at 5: ▪ Interest income on income equalisation accounts is credited each 31 March. This means that the payer of interest income is required to deduct resident withholding tax on 31 March.  ▪ When a deposit is withdrawn from an income equalisation account, both the interest on that deposit and the deposit itself are deemed to be assessable income and derived in the year of refund. ▪ The recipient is entitled to claim a resident withholding tax credit in the year of refund (ie the year in which the income is deemed to be derived, generally the year in which the application for the refund is received by IR). The recipient is not entitled to claim any resident withholding tax credit in a year when no refund is applied for. Law: IT07 s EH 6  ¶27-085 Forestry thinning operations income equalisation schemes A forestry company is entitled to make deposits to a thinning operations income equalisation account in respect of income from thinning operations. To qualify under the scheme, the company must be carrying on a forestry business on land in New Zealand. Deposits may be made only in respect of income from carrying out thinning operations, and the maximum deposit in any tax year is an amount equal to the income derived during the tax year from carrying out thinning operations in the year in respect of which the deposit is made. “Thinning operations” means the felling of some trees in an immature stand for the purpose of improving the growth and form of the trees remaining in the stand. The purpose of the tree felling cannot be to permanently break the canopy. Deposits under the scheme are allowed as a deduction from the income of the company in the year in respect of which they are made. There is no maximum time for which deposits by a forestry company may remain in its equalisation account. Thus, there is no automatic refund after five years. A refund is made only on application by the company (after the expiration of at least one year) or on the liquidation of the company. A refund of amounts deposited for at least six months may be made if the refund is required to  enable the forestry company to undertake planned development or maintenance work for its forestry business. A refund may be made at any time after deposit if it is required to prevent the company suffering serious hardship or for any other reason at the Commissioner’s discretion. A refund made on application or for development or recovery is income of the person. This income is derived in the income year in which the Commissioner receives the refund application. A refund made on liquidation is income of the person that is derived immediately before the liquidation starts. The Commissioner’s policy on accepting income equalisation deposits and refund applications for an accounting year outside the specified period also applies to forestry income from thinning. See standard practice statement SPS 19/03, ¶27-070 and ¶27-075. Law: IT07 ss CB 27, DQ 3, EH 63–EH 79  ¶27-120 Adverse event income equalisation scheme prior to 19 March 2019 ▸ Note: With effect for income years commencing after 18 March 2019, the adverse event scheme has been repealed and existing balances in the scheme have been transferred to the main income equalisation scheme. Future deposits as a result of forced sales will be made under the main scheme. An adverse event income equalisation scheme operated in addition to the main income equalisation scheme under former ss EH 37 to EH 62. The special adverse event account assisted farmers who experienced adverse events (at a local rather than regional level) to carry income from forced livestock disposals over to the next income year. The amount deposited did not become taxable until the year in which it was withdrawn. Self-assessed adverse events Persons engaged in any farming or agricultural business were able to deposit in an adverse event income equalisation account income  arising from the forced disposal of livestock, or failure to replace livestock, due to a self-assessed adverse event. A self-assessed adverse event was any one of the following events that materially affected the business of the person: ▪ fire, flood, drought or other natural events, or ▪ sickness or disease among livestock. The person had to furnish the Commissioner with a statutory declaration describing the relevant event or occurrence and specifying how the person’s business was affected. To qualify as a deposit for a particular year, the amount had to be deposited no later than one month after the relevant balance date. Deposits could be withdrawn immediately but were transferred to the main income equalisation account if not withdrawn within 12 months of the deposit. The amount in an adverse event income equalisation account could not be assigned or charged or passed to any other person other than by operation of law, or be assets for the payment of the person’s debts (or the debts of a deceased estate), at any time before they had been refunded in accordance with the scheme. The only exception to this was the operation of the Insolvency Act 2006, where the person was an individual and was adjudicated bankrupt. Maximum deposit The amount deposited by a person under the scheme could not exceed, in respect of any year, the “maximum deposit” for that year. The maximum deposit for any year was determined by subtracting the “cost” of the stock disposed of from the livestock sale proceeds. If the person had livestock of the class disposed of at the end of the previous accounting year, the cost of livestock disposed of was determined using the previous year’s closing value for that class of livestock. If the person did not have livestock, the cost of livestock disposed of was calculated by using the following formula:  ((number at start × value) + (number bought × price)) ÷ (number at start + number bought) where: number at start meant the number of livestock of the class disposed of that the person had at the start of the accounting year in which the livestock was disposed of number bought meant the number of livestock of the class disposed of that the person acquired in the accounting year in which the livestock was disposed of, before the disposal price meant the average purchase price of the number bought, and value meant the opening value of the number at the start, determined without applying the herd scheme. Where a deposit exceeded the maximum deposit for that year, the amount of the excess was automatically refunded to the person by the Commissioner. Minimum deposit The minimum amount that could be deposited at one time was $200. However, where that amount took the total deposits for the year over the maximum deposit for that year, the minimum deposit was the amount required to take the total up to the year’s maximum deposit. Interest on deposits The adverse event income equalisation scheme interest rate for deposits was 6.5% pa, as set by regulations made by the GovernorGeneral. See the Income Tax (Adverse Event Income Equalisation Scheme Rate of Interest) Regulations 1995. Deductions from income When a deduction was allowed under former s DQ 2, the amount of the deduction was the lesser of a person’s total deposits for the  accounting year and the person’s adverse event maximum deposit for the tax year. Refunds from account On application to the Commissioner, deposits, including interest, were refundable at any time and were taxable in the year of refund. The income was derived in the income year in which the application for a refund was received by the Commissioner. Refunds from an adverse event income equalisation account were made on a “first in, first out” basis. Refunds had to total at least $200 or, where the account contained less than that amount, the balance in the account. Where a person had both a main income equalisation account and an adverse event income equalisation account, the maximum deposit allowed to the main account in any accounting year was equal to the income derived by the person in that accounting year from that business, less deposits to the adverse event account. There was provision for refunds of amounts deposited to the main income equalisation account for the purchase or replacement of livestock as a result of a self-assessed adverse event within six months of the date of deposit. See s EH 15 and ¶27-075. Death, retirement, bankruptcy, liquidation Provisions similar to those applying to refunds from main income equalisation accounts on retirement, death, bankruptcy or liquidation applied to refunds from adverse event income equalisation accounts. See ¶27-075.  DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE ¶27-165 Development expenditure All persons engaged in the business of farming or agriculture on land in New Zealand are able to claim a full deduction for certain capital development expenditure. The concept of a farming or agricultural  business is discussed at ¶27-010. Deductions will be permitted for expenditure incurred for the following: ▪ the destruction of weeds, plants or animal pests detrimental to the land ▪ the clearing, destruction or removal of scrub, stumps and undergrowth ▪ the repair of flood or erosion damage to the land ▪ the planting or maintaining of trees for the purpose of providing shelter, preventing or combating erosion, or preventing or mitigating detrimental effects on a watercourse or body of water from the discharge of farming or agricultural contaminants ▪ the construction on the land of fences for farming or agricultural purposes, including the purchase of wire or wire netting for the purpose of making new or existing fences rabbit-proof, and ▪ the regrassing and fertilising of all types of pasture, if the expenditure is not incurred in the course of a “significant capital activity”. A “significant capital activity” means an activity that enables a change in the nature or character of the farming being undertaken on the land, but it does not include an activity that enables a change to the intensity of the farming practice. See further Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 123. If a person (being the owner of a freehold or leasehold estate in land and who has leased or subleased the land to a person who carries on a farming or agriculture business on that land) incurs expenditure for which they are allowed a deduction under ss DO 1, DO 2, DO 4, DO 5 or DO 6, or they are allowed a deduction for expenditure incurred by another person, then the relevant provision applies as if the person were personally carrying on a farming or agriculture business on the land during the currency of the lease or sublease. Law: IT07 ss DO 1, DO 2, DO 10, YA 1  ¶27-175 Amortisation deductions for land improvements An amortisation type of deduction is available for certain expenses incurred in effecting land improvements. The person claiming the deduction must be carrying on a farming or agricultural business. Some of the types of expenditure for which an amortisation deduction is permitted are: ▪ construction of access roads or tracks to, or on, the land ▪ sinking of bores or wells for the purpose of supplying water for use on the land ▪ planting of non-listed horticultural plants on the land (see below) ▪ construction on the land of supporting frames for growing crops, and ▪ construction on the land of structures for shelter purposes. A full list of the eligible expenses can be found in sch 20 pt A. The amount of the deduction allowed is the relevant percentage (see sch 20) of the diminished value of the expenditure, ie the relevant percentage is applied to the amount of the expenditure originally incurred, less all amounts previously deducted. Note that prior to 1 April 2013, a 20% loading on top of the percentage rates set out in sch 20 applied to the relevant expenditure. However, with the removal of the 20% loading on depreciable assets generally, the government also sought to remove the 20% loading on development expenditure. A person who owns the land can deduct both expenditure incurred by the person and expenditure incurred by any other person (eg a former owner of the land). A person who does not own the land can deduct only expenditure that person has incurred. Before a deduction is allowed, it must be shown that the expenditure was of benefit to the business in the income year to which it relates. No  deduction is available in the income year in which the person disposes of the land. Non-listed horticultural plants Briefly, a “non-listed horticultural plant” is a horticultural plant, tree, vine, bush, cane or similar plant that is cultivated on land and is not a listed horticultural plant (see ¶27-400). Ornamental trees or plants are included in the definition. Specifically excluded from the definition are trees planted mainly for the purpose of timber production. A deduction for the planting of non-listed horticultural plants is determined under the above rules. The relevant percentage of amortisation is 10% of the diminished value of the expenditure. If any question arises as to whether trees are planted mainly for the purpose of timber production, a certificate issued by any of the following people will be conclusive evidence for the purposes of the deduction: ▪ a properly authorised officer of the relevant Regional Council ▪ a properly authorised officer of the Ministry of Forestry, or ▪ any other person suitably qualified to give a certificate. Deductions for planting listed horticultural plants are covered at ¶27390 to ¶27-410. Capital contributions A “capital contribution” is a payment received under an agreement that is to be applied towards the acquisition of “capital contribution property” under the terms of the agreement. Capital contribution property includes improvements for which expenditure is or would be deductible for the recipient under s DO 4 or DO 11. Capital contributions received by a person are treated as income under s CG 8 in the year of receipt and the following nine years (see ¶5-356), unless the person elects to apply s DB 64. If s DB 64 is applied, the capital contribution will reduce the amount of the  expenditure for the purposes of applying s DO 4 or DO 11 (see ¶10200). Plants ceasing to exist Expenditure incurred in the planting of non-listed horticultural plants may be written off where the plants have been scrapped by the person or have ceased to be used to derive income. Inland Revenue policy on land improvements Inland Revenue set out its policy on claiming deductions for expenditure on land improvements used for farming or agriculture, land improvements used for forestry, and improvements in relation to aquaculture, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 12, May 1994 at 2. Depreciable property does not include (with a limited exception) property for which a person is allowed a deduction for the cost other than under subpart EE. Example: A farmer constructed an access track for use by his stock. The track included a culvert under a road. In the past, he has claimed a deduction of 6% pa on this expenditure under sch 20 pt A cl 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007. However, after looking through the depreciation schedule, he found that this included both roads and culverts. Because the farmer was eligible for a deduction under s DO 4 for the expenditure specified in sch 20, no deduction was allowable under the depreciation rules.  Generally, if expenditure on a land improvement is deductible to the original owner, the new owner cannot depreciate the land improvement. See ¶13-034. Destroyed land improvements A deduction is allowed for the book value of expenditure for land improvements that have been amortised in accordance with sch 20 and that are destroyed or made useless. The damage must not have been caused by a person’s action or failure to act. An additional deduction is also permitted for the cost of removing the destroyed or useless sch 20 improvement from the land.  Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, DO 4, DO 11, EE 7(i), YA 1, sch 20 pt A; TAA s 44C(3), (4)  LIVESTOCK ¶27-220 Livestock as trading stock Any person who carries on a business must take into account the value of the person’s trading stock at the beginning of the income year. For these purposes, livestock used in a dealing business is included in the definition of “trading stock”. The opening and closing values of such livestock are taken into account in the calculation of net income or net loss for that year. See s EB 3. This is accomplished as follows: ▪ an amount equal to the value of the livestock on hand at the end of the previous income year as calculated under s EB 3 is allowed as a deduction, and ▪ the value of livestock at the end of the current year calculated under s EB 3 is a person’s income. The difference between the two is the amount that is actually included as income. That amount may, of course, be income or a deduction, depending on whether the end-of-year value is more or less than the value at the end of the previous year. Provision is made for the method of valuing trading stock at the beginning and end of the income year. The opening value is to be the value of the trading stock as at the end of the previous income year. The livestock valuation rules govern the valuation of closing livestock numbers for the purpose of determining a farmer’s net income. These rules are contained mainly in subpart EC. Provision is made in s FB 13 for determining the transfer value where trading stock is transferred under relationship agreements (the term “relationship agreements” extends to agreements between de facto and civil union partners in circumstances where the Property (Relationships)  Act 1976 applies). Also see ss FB 13(6) and FB 14 in relation to specified livestock transferred under a relationship agreement. The livestock valuation options contained in subpart EC do not apply to livestock used in dealing operations. Such livestock continue to be dealt with under the normal trading stock rules. The trading stock valuation rules are discussed further beginning at ¶9-020. Adverse event If livestock is donated for use in a business affected by a selfassessed adverse event, it is treated as leaving the donor’s business at zero value and entering the recipient’s business at zero value. For a discussion of the tax treatment of trading stock (other than livestock) donated as a result of a self-assessed adverse event, see ¶9-087. Law: IT07 ss CH 1, DB 49, EA 1, EB 1–EB 3, EC 5, FB 13, FB 14  LIVESTOCK VALUATION ¶27-235 Main features of livestock valuation schemes A person who owns or carries on business (other than a livestock dealing business) has four main valuation options to choose from when livestock is held for the purposes of sale or exchange in the carrying on of that business: the herd scheme, the market value or replacement price options, the national standard cost scheme, and the self-assessed cost option. Herd scheme The herd scheme exempts all movements in herd values from tax. Only increases or decreases in stock numbers valued under the scheme have tax consequences. The main features of the herd scheme are as follows: ▪ All livestock classes remain eligible for the herd scheme.  ▪ Farmers in the herd scheme are able to value some stock of a class under an alternative valuation option, such as national standard cost. This is the case provided the herd numbers do not fall below the lesser of the closing number for the previous year or the number on hand. ▪ An exception is that all breeding sires must be valued in the herd scheme where animals of the same type are valued under a cost scheme. ▪ Animals of a class can be moved into the herd scheme progressively as there is no requirement to include all animals of a class on the scheme at once. Effectively, the use of the scheme is allowed on an animal-by-animal basis. ▪ Farmers have the ability to influence the level of income arising from increased herd livestock by valuing the increased numbers under an alternative valuation option, and by controlling the movement of animals on to the herd scheme. ▪ Differential herd values (ranging from 90% to 130%) allow farmers to select a value that is more in line with the true value of their livestock, provided the choice is supported by independent valuation. The change from 100% to a differential herd value is income (or a deduction). ▪ National average market values are set using a “snapshot” of livestock values on a particular date. Elections to use the herd scheme are irrevocable. See ¶27-264. Market value and replacement price schemes In broad terms, the market value and replacement price options achieve the same result for livestock valuation purposes. Use of these options should be supported by a valuation from a recognised livestock agent. There is free movement between these options and the national standard cost and self-assessed cost schemes.  However, the market value and replacement price options are unlikely to be used unless these values fall below cost. See ¶27-266. National standard cost scheme The national standard cost scheme is based on national average costs of production. A farmer will apply national standard costs to homebred stock, while all purchased stock will be valued at purchase price. The average of these costs will be applied to stock on hand at year’s end to derive a closing value. The difference between opening and closing stock value is taken into account in determining income. The self-assessed cost scheme is an alternative cost option. The main variation between the national standard cost scheme and the self-assessed cost option is that selfassessed costs use a farmer’s own costs of production, while national standard costs use nationally provided average costs. The main features of the national standard cost scheme are as follows: ▪ The scheme is based on national average costs of production. ▪ Homebred stock are valued using national average costs for breeding, rearing and growing. ▪ A national average rearing and growing cost will be added to homebred rising two-year stock. ▪ Except for rising three-year male non-breeding stock, no rearing and growing costs will be added beyond homebred rising twoyear stage. Costs are accumulated to maturity (generally rising two-year stage) and are held at that level within an inventory system until the stock is disposed of (ie the cost of an animal will remain constant for its mature life). ▪ An inventory system is required for mature mixed-age classes to calculate closing inventory value under national standard cost. The minimum standard of an inventory system is the average cost inventory system. More complicated alternatives are specific identification and first-in first-out (FIFO) costing.  ▪ All purchased livestock are taken into account at actual purchase price. ▪ The average of homebred costs and purchase costs is applied to stock on hand at year’s end to derive a closing value. ▪ Free movement between national standard cost, market value or replacement price on an inventory grouping basis is allowed, but a two-year notice period is required for movement between national standard cost and self-assessed cost. See further at ¶27-295. ▪ The national standard cost scheme can be used in conjunction with the herd scheme. See ¶27-267. Self-assessed cost The self-assessed cost option is based on farmers assessing their own costs according to guidelines issued by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. The national standard cost scheme uses national average costs of production. The self-assessed cost guidelines use livestock units (a well-accepted unit based on feed intake) to apportion farm costs between livestock types. The apportioned costs are accumulated to determine the cost of livestock production in a year. The main features of the self-assessed cost option are as follows: ▪ Self-assessed cost is an alternative to national standard cost for persons who wish to assess their own costs. ▪ Persons cannot use the self-assessed cost option and the national standard cost scheme in the same income year. Any change from the self-assessed cost option to the national standard cost scheme requires two years’ notice. See further at ¶27-295. ▪ The rules governing the self-assessed cost option are not contained in legislation but are set out in guidelines issued by  Inland Revenue. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 7, March 1993, Appendix A. See ¶27-268. Other areas covered by the livestock valuation provisions The other areas covered by the livestock valuation provisions are: high-priced livestock; non-specified livestock; movement between schemes; and income equalisation and adverse event provisions. High-priced livestock Livestock that qualifies as “high-priced livestock”, as defined in s YA 1, must be valued under the provisions governing this type of livestock. The high-priced livestock scheme applies only to livestock costing $500 or more. The purchase price must also be at least five times the greater of the national average market value for the relevant livestock class for the income year in which the animal is purchased and the national average market value for the same livestock class for the immediately preceding income year. Straightline or diminishing value depreciation is available at the person’s option. Once animals have been depreciated to the national average market values, they must be removed from the high-priced regime and valued under one of the other options. See ¶27-290. Non-specified livestock Non-specified livestock (eg rabbits, opossums, emus, alpacas, and horses that do not come within the definition of “bloodstock” (see ¶27-300)) is valued under: ▪ the market value option ▪ the replacement price option ▪ the cost price option, or ▪ if the Commissioner agrees, the standard value option.  See ¶27-280. Movement between schemes The main features of the rules governing movement between schemes are as follows: ▪ There is free movement from the national standard cost or from the self-assessed cost scheme to the market value or replacement price schemes. ▪ A person can move animals to the herd scheme at any time on an animal-by-animal basis; this applies to the adoption of the scheme and to progressive movement of stock numbers or classes to the herd scheme. ▪ Any increase in stock numbers in any herd class valued under the herd scheme can be valued under an alternative valuation option provided a minimum number is valued under the herd scheme. ▪ In some cases, notice of an election to change valuation methods must be given. ▪ A person cannot use both the national standard cost and selfassessed cost in the same year. ▪ An election to use the herd scheme is irrevocable, with limited exceptions. See ¶27-295. ▸Note: Proposed amendments for Mycoplasma bovis The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes changes to ensure that farmers whose herds were culled in response to the Mycoplasma eradication programme will not face an undue tax burden.  In summary, it is proposed that farmers that have culled their breeding livestock (including growing replacements) because of Mycoplasma bovis, will be allowed to spread the additional income derived as a result of the cull of that stock over the following six years. The income will only be able to be spread if: ▪ The business has been subject to Biosecurity Security New Zealand requiring a cull of Mycoplasma bovis affected stock. ▪ The business is a dairy or a beef breeding operation, with the breeding stock that is culled being valued under national standard cost or self-assessed cost. The expectation is that the breeding stock that is culled would comprise mainly mixed-aged cows, in combination with any other class of breeding stock. ▪ The stock is substantially replaced through purchasing equivalent breeding stock by the end of the income year following the cull year. ▪ The replacement stock continues to be valued using, as relevant, national standard cost or the cost price method. This is to ensure that farmers cannot enter the herd scheme on more advantageous terms than those not affected by Mycoplasma bovis. Given that a livestock owner might use a couple of valuation methods in combination, not all of the breeding stock might be valued at cost. However, only the income derived from the culling of the breeding stock valued under the national standard cost or the self-assessed cost scheme will be able to be spread. For this purpose, breeding stock will include immature female stock intended for future breeding in the business. Owners of the affected livestock, including sharemilkers, will be covered, that is, the ability to spread income from the cull will not be limited to just the owners of farmland with livestock. The qualifying proceeds from the cull will comprise payments from the slaughterhouse, top-up compensation from the government for  the difference between the normal market value for the stock and the payments from the slaughterhouse, and in some cases, further compensation to cover the additional cost of purchasing equivalent replacement stock. The income arising from the culling of stock valued under another valuation method, or stock culled from a fattening stock business valued under the national standard cost scheme, will not qualify for this spreading provision. The income equalisation scheme is available in those circumstances to mitigate the income implications of the cull. To assist farmers wishing to use the income equalisation scheme, a class of case has been approved for those who were instructed by Biosecurity New Zealand to cull livestock because of Mycoplasma bovis. This allows for late deposits up to 30 April 2020 and for early refunds. The proposed amendments are intended to apply retrospectively from the 2017–18 income year, as the culls began in late 2017. Law: IT07 subpart EC, s YA 1  ¶27-260 Specified livestock There are six different types of specified livestock. These are sheep, beef cattle, dairy cattle, deer, goats and pigs. These types are set out in column 1 of sch 17 of the Income Tax Act 2007, together with the various classes into which those types of specified livestock are divided (column 2). These classes of livestock are referred to in all valuation methods. For the purposes of the national standard cost scheme, livestock are also classified into categories and inventory groupings: ▪ There are 16 categories of livestock. These are the categories for which national standard costs are declared annually for the purpose of the national standard cost scheme. These categories are set out in sch 18.  ▪ There are two inventory groupings referred to in the national standard cost scheme. These are: rising one-year stock, and mature stock (which includes rising two-year stock). Each year, there are declared national average market values for use under the herd scheme and national standard costs for use under the national standard cost scheme. See ¶27-264 and ¶27-267. Specified livestock excludes animals that are high-priced livestock, except as provided in s EC 37 in relation to bailment. See ¶27-272. Law: IT07 s YA 1, schs 17, 18  ¶27-264 Herd scheme The herd scheme is a valuation method that farmers can apply to each type of specified livestock (sheep, cattle, deer, goats and pigs). It values each type of livestock on the basis of age classes at national average market values (NAMV) set annually. In each income year, herd livestock on hand at both opening and closing balance dates are valued at the NAMV announced for that income year. The difference is recorded in the statement of financial position as a “livestock revaluation reserve”. This effectively removes any income arising from the movement of livestock values between years. The philosophy underlying the herd scheme is the treatment of the herd as a capital asset. It is for this reason that movements in the NAMV between years are treated as a capital gain or loss to the farmer. Although these overriding principles have been maintained, a number of changes have been made which increase the flexibility of the scheme. In addition, improvements have been made to the way in which the NAMV are calculated each year, thereby increasing the accuracy of the valuations. These alterations and additions are as follows: ▪ Dairy and beef cattle have been separated into two livestock types. ▪ The classes of livestock eligible for the herd scheme have been widened. A farmer can select which classes of livestock to value  under the scheme and can value any number of livestock under that scheme. Previously, a farmer was required to value all core classes of mature stock (mainly breeding stock) under the scheme and was required to value all animals of a class on that scheme. ▪ Subject to meeting minimum number requirements, any increase in numbers of livestock valued under the herd scheme may be valued under another valuation option (an alternative valuation option). An exception is that all breeding sires must be valued in the herd scheme where some animals of the same type are valued under the herd scheme. A further exception is that livestock qualifying as high-priced livestock must be valued under the high-priced livestock scheme. ▪ Animals of a class which have been valued using the herd scheme cannot be switched to another valuation option. This measure was introduced to prevent farmers from achieving tax advantages by switching freely to and from the herd scheme. A limited exception applies to the irrevocability of herd scheme elections where there is a change of farming operations from a breeding operation to a fattening operation. The purchaser in an associated party transaction must adopt the vendor’s herd scheme elections and base herd numbers The herd scheme values applied to the transfer depend upon which tax year the transfer takes place in as between the parties, ie whether in the same tax year for both parties, or in an earlier or later tax year for the transferee. A limited exception to the associated parties rule applies to inter-generational transfers made at market value and on commercial terms and conditions (other than those relating to financing). A four-year time frame also applies to the exception — if the vendor recommences a farming business within this period, the transferee will be required to adopt the herd scheme with retrospective effect. See discussion below.  ▪ Animals of a class can be moved into the herd scheme progressively, as there is no requirement to include all animals of a class in the scheme at once. ▪ Farmers may elect to value their herd value livestock at a value that varies from the NAMV, provided the choice is supported by independent valuation. The differential herd value, or herd value ratio, is 90%, 100%, 110%, 120% or 130% of the year’s NAMV for any or all of the types of livestock. The Tax Education Office noted that by adopting such ratios, a taxpayer’s livestock may be valued more accurately by taking into account regional values and variations in quality of livestock from farm to farm. These advantages may be outweighed, however, by the Commissioner’s ability to require the ratio to be reassessed. See Tax Education Office Newsletter No 142 at 6. ▪ National average market values are set using a “snapshot” of livestock values on a particular date. National average market values The NAMV used to value livestock under the herd scheme are calculated using the “snapshot” valuation method. This method uses a survey based on the opinions of livestock valuers on a particular date. The snapshot will be taken on 30 April each year. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 1, July 1993 at 4. The NAMV are set by the Commissioner by determination for each class of specified livestock set out in column 2 of sch 17 of the Income Tax Act 2007. The determination is made in May of each year after a national survey of market values at 30 April. These values apply to the income year for which they are set, whether the income year started before, on or after the date on which the determination was made. National average market values are also used as a base for the high-priced livestock scheme. The following table sets out the NAMV for specified livestock on hand at the end of the 2019–20 income year. These rates were set by the National Average Market Values of Specified Livestock  Determination, 2020 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 8).  National Average Market Values Type of Livestock  Classes of Livestock  Average Market Value per Head $  Sheep Ewe hoggets  108.00  Ram and wether hoggets  105.00  Two-tooth ewes  177.00  Mixed-age ewes (rising threeyear and four-year old ewes)  156.00  Rising five-year and older ewes  128.00  Mixed-age wethers  105.00  Breeding rams  340.00  Beef cattle Beef breeds and beef crosses: Rising one-year heifers  526.00  Rising two-year heifers  888.00  Mixed-age cows  1,090.00  Rising one-year steers and bulls  678.00  Rising two-year steers and bulls  1,035.00  Rising three-year and older steers and bulls  1,315.00  Type of Livestock  Classes of Livestock  Average Market Value per Head $  Breeding bulls  2,950.00  Dairy cattle Friesian and related breeds, Jersey and other dairy breeds: Rising one-year heifers  737.00  Rising two-year heifers  1,222.00  Mixed-age cows  1,525.00  Rising one-year steers and bulls  471.00  Rising two-year steers and bulls  818.00  Rising three-year and older steers and bulls  1,186.00  Breeding bulls  1,711.00  Deer Red deer, wapiti, elk and related crossbreeds: Rising one-year hinds  236.00  Rising two-year hinds  405.00  Mixed-age hinds  430.00  Rising one-year stags  283.00  Rising two-year and older stags (non-breeding)  455.00  Breeding stags  1,990.00  Other breeds: Rising one-year hinds  157.00  Type of Livestock  Classes of Livestock  Average Market Value per Head $  Rising two-year hinds  230.00  Mixed-age hinds  265.00  Rising one-year stags  169.00  Rising two-year and older stags (non-breeding)  261.00  Breeding stags  655.00  Goats Angora and angora crosses (mohair producing): Rising one-year does  92.00  Mixed-age does  117.00  Rising one-year bucks (nonbreeding)/wethers  52.00  Bucks (non-breeding)/wethers over one year  66.00  Breeding bucks  448.00  Other fibre and meat producing goats (cashmere or cashgora producing): Rising one-year does  74.00  Mixed-age does  104.00  Rising one-year bucks (nonbreeding)/wethers  51.00  Bucks (non-breeding)/wethers over one year  68.00  Type of Livestock  Classes of Livestock  Average Market Value per Head $  Breeding bucks  374.00  Milking (dairy) goats: Rising one-year does  321.00  Does over one year  430.00  Breeding bucks  588.00  Other dairy goats  84.00  Breeding sows less than one year of age  204.00  Breeding sows over one year  306.00  Breeding boars  442.00  Weaners less than 10 weeks of age (excluding sucklings)  87.00  Growing pigs 10 to 17 weeks of age (porkers and baconers)  144.00  Growing pigs over 17 weeks of age (baconers)  205.00  Pigs  Moving animals to and from herd scheme All specified livestock types and classes are eligible to be valued under the herd scheme. There is free movement to the scheme and animals can be valued under a different scheme (an alternative valuation option — AVO) subject to meeting the following three requirements:  ▪ first, the numbers for any class cannot be reduced below the lesser of the number valued in the herd scheme in the previous year or the number on hand ▪ secondly, where the herd scheme is being used in conjunction with one of the cost options, all breeding sires of that type must be valued under the herd scheme, and ▪ thirdly, animals of a class which have been valued under the herd scheme cannot be switched to another valuation option. For example, if 200 mixed-age cows are valued under the herd scheme in the 2018–19 income year, at least 200 must be valued under the herd scheme in 2019–20. However, any number in excess of 200 may be valued under the herd scheme in 2019–20. More than one alternative valuation option can be used for each livestock type, but only one alternative valuation method can be used for each inventory grouping within that type. Example 1: Opening herd number  Total closing stock  Minimum closing herd number  Maximum eligible for AVO  (1)  (2)  (1)–(2)  Rising one-year heifers  100  120  100  20  Rising two-year heifers  140  150  140  10  Cows  180  150  150  0  Breeding bulls  3  4  4  0  Notes: ▪ There was a decrease in mixed-age cows below last year’s herd numbers and this resulted in the minimum herd number being set at the number on hand. ▪ There was an increase in breeding bulls, but all breeding sires must be valued on the herd scheme (unless high-priced) when some animals (of the type) are valued under national standard cost or self-assessed cost.  Example reproduced from CCH, Tax Guide to Farming, Forestry and Fishing, para 5.4.9.2.  Where the closing number of a livestock class is lower than the previous year’s closing number, a new base number is set at the number on hand for that year. Any subsequent recoveries of those stock numbers can be valued under an alternative option. Alternative valuation options for herd number increases above the minimum number are: ▪ national standard cost ▪ self-assessed cost ▪ market value, and ▪ replacement price. Herd value ratios Persons may use herd value ratios that are a percentage of the NAMV. This gives farmers an opportunity to adopt self-assessed values, to some extent, to take account of variations of individual livestock values for reasons such as location, stock quality or farming policies. The values that may be adopted are 90%, 100%, 110%, 120% or 130% of NAMV (these equate to herd value ratios of 0.9, 1.0, 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3). A different herd value ratio may be adopted for each livestock type. This allows, for instance, a farmer with high-value stock to write them up to 130%. A farmer with lowvalue stock may remove the unrealisable income component in their values by writing them down to 90% of NAMV. In order to adopt a herd value ratio that is a variation from 100% of NAMV, a formal valuation of the stock is required. The valuation must be obtained from a “recognised livestock valuer”. See s EC 17(4). The Commissioner may, at any time, require a person to recalculate a herd value ratio if an inaccurate ratio has been used.  A person must apply to the Commissioner to adopt a herd value ratio or a recalculated herd value ratio. The notice must be a two-year notice. For instance, if a person wishes to apply a differential herd value ratio for the 2021–22 income year, the person would have to obtain a valuation as at 30 April 2020, and give notice with the tax return for the 2019–20 income year. An exception to the two-year notice requirement exists if it is the first year the livestock is valued under the herd scheme. In that case the notice must be given by the date of filing the tax return for that income year. The information to be included in the notice is set out in s EC 11(4). Chatham Islands The herd value ratios ranging from 0.9 to 1.3 cannot be used for livestock on the Chatham Islands. Instead, the Commissioner will set a Chatham Islands herd value ratio (known as the Chatham Islands adjustment) from time to time for each type of specified livestock. An election to use that ratio is made in accordance with s EC 11. The Chatham Islands ratio for sheep and beef cattle is 0.3 of the NAMV. This means that Chatham Islands farmers may elect to value their sheep and beef cattle at 30% of the national average market values (herd values). Inland Revenue reviews this ratio annually and will amend it if it becomes significantly out of line. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 2, August 1993, Appendix. Associated party transfers Previously, some farmers were using associated party transactions to enable an exit from the herd scheme so they could achieve taxfree increases in livestock values under the herd scheme and then tax-deductible decreases in values under a cost-based regime. Rules now ensure that for transfers of herd scheme livestock between associated parties, the purchaser steps into the position of the vendor for the herd scheme election, herd scheme base numbers and herd scheme values. The rules only apply where the transfer is not in the ordinary course of business. Inland Revenue has stated that given the various potential scenarios this has  deliberately been left up to the parties’ judgment and that common sense should apply — see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 5. Where the rule in s EC 4B applies, the transferee is treated as having made a herd scheme election. Inland Revenue has provided the following explanation and example of the application of the section: Example 2: The steps involved are as follows: Step 1: The vendor calculates hypothetical year-end numbers for a class as if the associated persons sale had not taken place. Step 2: These are then compared with the vendor’s opening herd scheme tallies for that class. Step 3: The lowest of these numbers (being the minimum that the vendor could value in the herd scheme in the year of transfer if the transfer had not occurred) becomes the “hypothetical year-end herd scheme amount”. Step 4: From this is subtracted the actual year-end numbers of the class that the vendor has on hand. Step 5: The balance is then the number of livestock of that class that the associated person acquirer must value in the herd scheme. Note that the calculations focus on the class that the livestock would be (or would have been) at year-end, not as at the date of the transfer. Step  R2 Heifers  Example A  Example B  1  On hand at yearend  80  80  1  Associated party transfer  25  15  1  Hypothetical yearend numbers  105  95  2  Opening herd scheme  100  100  3  Lesser of  100  95  4  Actual on hand  80  80  5  Therefore acquirer herd scheme  20  15  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 5.  The number obtained from the above calculation increases the acquirer’s minimum herd scheme numbers for that class and that year. Section EC 4C provides that for income tax purposes the transfer of livestock that the transferee is required to value in the herd scheme is deemed to take place at herd scheme values that apply at the end of the year of the transfer, presuming that both parties are in the same tax year when the transfer takes place. If this is not the case, it depends on which of the parties is in a later tax year, but the objective is to ensure that there is one herd scheme adjustment to opening herd scheme livestock valuations for each tax year. If the transferee acquires the livestock in a tax year earlier than the tax year in which the transferor disposes of it, the transfer is treated as a disposal and acquisition at the value of the relevant livestock under the herd scheme at the beginning of the transferor’s corresponding income year. If the transferee acquires the livestock in a tax year later than the tax year in which the transferor disposes of it, then the transfer is treated as a disposal and acquisition at the value of the relevant livestock under the herd scheme at the end of the transferor’s corresponding income year. For the purposes of determining the transferee’s opening value under s EC 16, the transferee is treated as owning and valuing the relevant livestock under the herd scheme at the end of the previous year. Exception An exception from the rule applies where there is an intergenerational transfer — s EC 4B(2). For the exception to apply, the transferee must only be associated because the transferee or an associate is the son, daughter or grandchild of the transferor or an associate. In addition, the transfer must be at market value, wholly on arm’s length commercial terms and conditions (ignoring finance conditions), and the transferor or associate must dispose of all their specified livestock and cease deriving income from the disposal of specified livestock as part of a farming business for the next four  income years. The transferor can therefore continue grazing a few animals on a lifestyle block, for example, or farm non-specified livestock, without affecting the exception. Section EC 4B(3) provides that the associated persons exception applies to a deceased estate if the exception would have applied to the transfer made to or from the estate or under the will if that transfer had been made immediately before death. However, the exception will not apply if the will creates a life interest in the relevant livestock. Relationship agreement transfers The associated person rules in ss EC 4B and EC 4C also apply where specified livestock that is valued under the herd scheme is transferred under a relationship agreement. (The term “relationship agreement” extends to agreements between de facto and civil union partners in circumstances where the Property (Relationships) Act 1976 applies.) Ceasing livestock farming Special rules apply where a person ceases farming. Section EC 20 provides that where a person stops deriving income from specified livestock and the livestock is disposed of before 1 November that precedes the release of the NAMV, it is compulsory to value the herd livestock using the NAMV and herd value ratios for the previous year. Although note that this will not apply where the disposal falls within the associated person rules discussed above. Law: IT07 ss EC 4B, EC 4C, EC 8, EC 14–EC 21, FB 15  ¶27-266 Market value and replacement price valuation The general rule allows free movement between cost, market value or replacement price in any year. It would appear that replacement price is probably the same as market value for livestock valuation purposes. The legislation does not define how market values are to be determined, or by whom. However, historically, Inland Revenue has indicated that market value would be the value that the livestock  would be worth on the open market if they were available for sale in the normal course of business to an arm’s-length party at balance date. With regard to replacement price, Inland Revenue has indicated that the meaning of replacement price in s EB 10 would be applied. Thus, replacement price would be the market value of the livestock on the last day of the income year or, if there is no such market value, the last price paid during the income year to acquire equivalent livestock. Input tax on any purchase of replacement livestock is disregarded. It may be prudent to obtain a desk valuation from a recognised livestock agent to support any use of the market value option. Law: IT07 ss EC 10, EC 25  ¶27-267 National standard cost scheme The national standard cost scheme is an optional scheme, the main features of which are as follows: ▪ The scheme is based on national average costs of production. ▪ Rising one-year homebred stock are valued using national average costs for breeding, rearing and growing costs. ▪ A national average rearing and growing cost is added to homebred rising two-year stock. ▪ Except for rising three-year male non-breeding stock, no rearing and growing costs will be added beyond homebred rising twoyear stock so that costs are accumulated to maturity (generally rising two-year stage) and are held at that level within an inventory system until the stock is disposed of (ie the cost for an animal will remain constant for its mature life). ▪ An inventory system is required for mature mixed-aged classes to calculate the closing inventory value under national standard cost. The minimum standard of inventory system is the average  cost inventory system. Alternative inventory systems are specific identification and first-in first-out. ▪ All livestock acquired other than by way of being homebred are taken into account at acquisition cost. ▪ The average of homebred costs and acquisition costs is applied to stock on hand at the year’s end to derive a closing value. ▪ Free movement between national standard cost, market value or replacement price on an inventory grouping basis is allowed, but a two-year notice period is required for movement from or to the self-assessed cost option. ▪ National standard cost can be used in conjunction with the herd scheme. But, where a person values some livestock of any type under the herd scheme, all breeding sires of that livestock type must be valued under the herd scheme. ▪ All animals qualifying as high-priced livestock must be valued under that scheme. ▪ Persons who bail or lease livestock are eligible to use the national standard cost scheme for bailed livestock only where the person expects, at the time of delivery of the livestock to the bailee or lessee, to have the same livestock redelivered or where the bailment or lease was made pursuant to a profitsharing arrangement as defined in s YA 1. If redelivery will occur, the normal rules apply as if the bailed livestock were livestock on hand. See ss EC 9 and EC 27, and cl 18 of the Income Tax (National Standard Costs for Livestock) Determination 1994. National standard cost values The Commissioner makes a determination for each category of specified livestock listed in column 2 of sch 18.  The national standard costs for the 2020–21 income year were set in the National Standard Costs for Specified Livestock Determination 2021. The table in the determination is reproduced below. Kind of Livestock  Category of Livestock  National Standard Cost $  Sheep  Dairy Cattle  Beef Cattle  Deer  Goats (Meat and Fibre)  Goats (Dairy)  Rising 1 year  37.50  Rising 2 year  26.90  Purchased bobby calves  189.60  Rising 1 year  450.80  Rising 2 year  309.70  Rising 1 year  399.80  Rising 2 year  226.20  Rising 3 year male non-breeding cattle (all breeds)  226.20  Rising 1 year  106.40  Rising 2 year  62.00  Rising 1 year  31.60  Rising 2 year  21.60  Rising 1 year  273.80  Kind of Livestock  Category of Livestock  National Standard Cost $  Pigs  Rising 2 year  58.30  Weaners to 10 weeks of age  106.90  Growing pigs 10 to 17 weeks of age  88.00  The national standard cost scheme is based on national average costs of production. Farmers who use the scheme apply the standard costs of stock bred on the farm or on hand at the beginning of the income year. Stock they acquire are valued at the acquisition cost. The average of these costs is applied to stock on hand at the end of the year to derive the closing value of livestock on hand. The difference between the opening and closing values is used to determine income. Determination The method of valuing livestock by averaging homebred costs and acquisition costs to arrive at an average cost, to be applied to all specified livestock of a person that is valued under the national standard cost scheme, is set out in determinations issued by the Commissioner. See s EC 24. The matters to be provided in the determination are set out in s 91AAD of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The Commissioner is required to publish any determination on the national standard cost method in a publication chosen by the Commissioner within 30 days of the date on which it was made and signed by the Commissioner. A replacement determination does not apply to an income year of a person that ended on or before the day 30 days before the day on which that new determination is published. See s 91AAE. The determination procedure currently applicable is the Income Tax (National Standard Costs for Livestock) Determination 1994.  Note that the Income Tax (National Standard Costs for Livestock Determination) 2016 varied the 1994 Determination by replacing the following words, wherever they appear in the determination: “purchased” to “acquired”, “purchase” to “acquisition”, and “sales” to “disposals”. The changes were made as part of wider wording changes made by the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2015–16, Research and Development, and Remedial Matters) Act 2016. However, the Commissioner has emphasised that to come within the words used the transaction must be made for “consideration”, whether in money or some other form. For the avoidance of doubt, the Commissioner has confirmed that the words used do not include the acquisition of homebred livestock or livestock that has been gifted inter-generationally or donated. In addition, the words used do not include the disposal of livestock that dies or is culled and is disposed of on-farm or to still-born livestock (“slinks”). Although slinks are generally sold for monetary consideration, it is the Commissioner’s view that being still-born, slinks are not livestock and therefore not subject to any of the national standard costs for livestock determinations. Note however that amounts received for slinks should continue to be treated as part of the ordinary business income of a farmer. Law: IT07 ss EC 9, EC 22–EC 24, sch 18; TAA ss 91AAD, 91AAE  ¶27-268 Self-assessed cost scheme Self-assessed cost is the alternative cost option to national standard cost. It may be adopted by farmers who wish to use their own farm’s actual costs of production instead of the nationally announced national standard costs. The same rules regulating the national standard cost scheme apply to self-assessed cost. There are no legislative rules regulating the use of the self-assessed cost option. Instead, the Commissioner has issued guidelines and forms for the application of the self-assessed cost method. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 7, March 1993, Appendix A. Law: IT07 s EC 25(1)  ¶27-272 Bailed or leased livestock A bailment of livestock exists in any circumstances where the livestock is not in the owner’s care. The following are examples of bailments: livestock out for grazing; livestock subject to an agreement where the bailee (the receiver of the livestock) pays the bailor (the owner) for use of that livestock; any lease arrangement; most share-farming (but not sharemilking) arrangements; and livestock kept overnight at the vet. See Tax Education Office Newsletter No 73, 10 August 1993 at 10. See also 1996 Primary Sector Tax Course, New Zealand Society of Accountants, August 1996 at 53. Rules and limitations of valuation options for owners of bailed livestock Bailed livestock may not be valued according to self-assessed cost except where the following conditions are met: ▪ the person expected, at the time of delivery of livestock, the bailee to receive the same livestock back ▪ the bailee does not pay consideration to have the livestock ▪ the livestock is only away from the bailor over one balance date, and ▪ if the bailment is between associated persons, the rent paid by the bailor to the bailee is at fair market value. See Tax Education Office Newsletter No 73, 10 August 1993 at 10. The provisions of s EC 26 apply where a person has entered into a bailment, lease or other agreement for the use of specified livestock, including high-priced livestock, and the person is required to return the specified livestock or to pay full compensation for the specified livestock. Where that is the case, two consequences follow. First, the person is treated as owning the specified livestock. Secondly, in relation to each class of specified livestock, the person is to take into account, as trading stock at the end of each income year, the  number of specified livestock calculated according to a formula. See s EC 26(2). National standard cost or self-assessed cost may be used by owners of bailed or leased livestock where the owner expects, at the time of delivery of the livestock to the bailee or lessee, to have the same livestock redelivered to the owner or where the bailment or lease is made pursuant to a profit-sharing arrangement as defined in s YA 1 (for a discussion of this definition, see ¶23-189). See ss EC 9, EC 10 and EC 27. Inland Revenue published a binding product ruling BR Prd 08/02, applied for by StockCo Ltd, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 1, March 2009 at 6. This ruling covered an arrangement involving the purchase from and lease-back to farmers of livestock by StockCo Ltd, and the potential repurchase of that stock by the farmers. The purpose of the arrangement was for the farmers to realise capital that was tied up in stock, retire external debt, or fund the expansion of herds, land and/or the business as a result of proceeds from the sale of their stock. This type of arrangement can also assist new farmers in setting up a business, as capital set-up costs can be a barrier for new farmers wanting to enter the market. This type of arrangement also gives farmers certainty of income and expenditure that is not guaranteed under the current stock valuation methods. Law: IT07 ss EC 9(3), (4), EC 10(3)–(5), EC 26, EC 27, EC 37  ¶27-280 Non-specified livestock Non-specified livestock is defined in s YA 1 as livestock that is not specified livestock, high-priced livestock, or bloodstock. Nonspecified livestock includes horses, rabbits, dogs and ostriches. A separate valuation scheme applies to horses that can be classified as bloodstock. See ¶27-300. Valuation options At the end of each income year, non-specified livestock may be valued on the basis of its:  ▪ cost price ▪ market value ▪ replacement price, or ▪ if the Commissioner agrees, standard value. The person may choose between each of these alternatives. The Commissioner will, from time to time, determine standard values for any type or category of non-specified livestock. See ss EC 29 and EC 30. The Commissioner has not determined any standard values under these provisions to date. Progressive write-down to standard value Where a person elects to value non-specified livestock at standard value in some circumstances, the amount by which the cost of livestock exceeds the standard value for that non-specified livestock may be required to be deducted over three income years. The progressive write-down applies to a taxpayer who acquires additional livestock, not being replacement livestock or, from 1 April 2015, homebred livestock, during an income year or any of the following three income years because the person enhances production in an income year by: ▪ starting or restarting to derive income from non-specified livestock ▪ bringing land into production, or substantially increased production, for the purpose of deriving income from nonspecified livestock, or ▪ acquiring additional land for the purpose of deriving income from non-specified livestock. If the above criteria are met, the closing value of livestock acquired is:  ▪ for the income year of acquisition, the standard value plus twothirds of the difference between the cost price and the standard value ▪ for the following income year, the standard value plus one-third of the difference between the cost price and the standard value, and ▪ for the other income years, the standard value. Relationship agreement transfers Special rules apply to transfers under relationship agreements. (The term “relationship agreement” extends to agreements between de facto and civil union partners in circumstances where the Property (Relationships) Act 1976 applies.) These rules are set out in s FB 16. If land is acquired under a relationship agreement, the transferee is deemed to have acquired it on the day on which the land was acquired by the transferor. Where any non-specified livestock is transferred in accordance with a relationship agreement, and the person commences or recommences to derive income from the nonspecified livestock in that year, the person is deemed not to have commenced or recommenced to derive income from non-specified livestock by virtue of that transfer. However, the transfer is taken into account when determining whether any later acquisition of nonspecified livestock by the transferee means they have commenced or recommenced deriving income from non-specified livestock. If the transferee uses the non-specified livestock transferred under a relationship agreement to derive income and was not previously deriving income from non-specified livestock, then if the year of transfer falls in the first or second year of the three-year write-down period, the transferee must apply the appropriate written-down amount (as set out above) as if they were the transferor and the transfer had not taken place. That is, the transferee is effectively treated as the transferor as far as determining the closing value of the livestock. Valuation of ostriches and emus  Interpretation statement IS9702 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 9, No 8, August 1997 at 11) outlines the various valuation options available to persons who farm ostriches and/or emus. Inland Revenue acknowledges that ostriches and emus fall into the category of non-specified livestock. Consequently, options for valuation will be those of cost price, market price, replacement price or standard value. The Commissioner’s interpretation statement focuses on the cost price valuation option for ostriches and emus on hand at the end of an income year. However, it is also noted that the self-assessed cost price valuation is a guideline only, and that persons may adopt any other method that leads to an appropriate allocation of cost. In Tax Education Office Newsletter No 142, 15 December 1997 at 1, it is noted that if cost is being adopted to value these birds, appropriate regard should be given to agistment, freight and quarantine costs. Law: IT07 ss EC 28–EC 31, FB 16, YA 1  ¶27-290 High-priced livestock Any sheep, beef cattle, dairy cattle, deer, goat or pig purchased in the income year must be valued under the high-priced livestock provisions if: ▪ it cost $500 or more ▪ at the time of purchase, it was capable of being used for breeding, or expected to be capable of being used for breeding on maturity, and ▪ the purchase price was not less than five times the greater of the national average market value for the relevant class for the income year of purchase or the preceding income year. The high-priced livestock scheme is a depreciation type of scheme. Under the scheme, the cost of high-priced stock is written down over the usual breeding life at rates defined for each type of stock. The  scheme applies only to stock purchased. Stock that are bred are therefore excluded. A person may choose to use either the straightline method or the diminishing value method to value high-priced livestock. Persons wishing to apply the diminishing value rate to an animal must use the diminishing value rate in the financial statements that support the tax return. Once a person makes this election, it is irrevocable. If there is no such clear use of the diminishing value rate, the straight-line rate will apply. See s EC 32. Depreciation percentage The Commissioner fixes the depreciation percentage. See s EC 33. This percentage is to represent the average percentage decline in the value of livestock of that type or class or category, having regard to: ▪ the average cost of that type or class or category of livestock ▪ the estimated useful life of the livestock, and ▪ the estimated average residual market value of the livestock. Livestock category  Straight-line rate  Diminishing value rate  Sheep  25%  33%  Cattle  20%  26%  Stags  20%  26%  Other deer  15%  22%  Goats  20%  26%  Pigs  33%  40%  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 2, August 1993, Appendix A at 23. Immature or recently purchased livestock  No depreciation may be claimed in the year of purchase of livestock where any high-priced livestock: ▪ is not more than one year of age at the end of the year of purchase, or ▪ is purchased within six months of the end of an income year, and within that period: □ has not been used for insemination or collection of semen, if male livestock, or □ has not given birth or had ova removed, if female livestock. This type of livestock must be valued at cost price at the end of that income year. See s EC 36. Transfer to other valuation methods High-priced livestock must be transferred to another scheme where: ▪ the value of any high-priced livestock at the end of an income year is equal to or less than the national average market value for that class, or ▪ the livestock is no longer expected to be used for breeding purposes for that or any later income year, and the person has no intention of selling the livestock to another person to be used for breeding purposes. The livestock will then be valued under the valuation method the person uses to value their specified livestock of that type. Relationship agreement transfer Where high-priced livestock is transferred pursuant to a relationship agreement, the transferee is treated as having acquired the livestock on the day it was acquired by the transferor, and at the price it was acquired by the transferor. The closing value of the stock for the income year of the transfer is the transfer value (determined in accordance with s EC 34), being the book value, reduced by an amount equal to the depreciation percentage of its cost price. In  other words, the transferee completes the balance of the write-down that the transferor would have adopted if the stock had not been transferred. The transferee is deemed to adopt the diminishing value method if the transferor has elected to adopt that method or, in the absence of such an election, if the transfer occurs in the same year as the high-priced livestock was acquired by the transferor, the transferor can elect the diminishing value method. Law: IT07 ss EC 32–EC 36, FB 17, YA 1  ¶27-295 Movement between schemes for specified livestock Subject to the specific rules for each livestock valuation method, a person may elect which of those methods will be used in any income year to value any specified livestock (excluding livestock used in dealing operations). In some cases, the election is made by adopting the method in the person’s tax return for the income year. In other cases, the Commissioner must be notified: see further below under the heading “Notice of election”. Once an election is made and the chosen method is applied in respect of an income year, the election will continue to apply in all subsequent income years until it is superseded by another valid election. Restrictions A livestock valuation election cannot be made (or, if made, will be ineffective) if the effect of the election is to allow the person to do any of the following: ▪ value any specified livestock under the national standard cost scheme (see ¶27-267) and the cost price method (see ¶27-268) in the same income year ▪ value specified livestock under the national standard cost scheme when in the last income year the person used the cost price method and the required two-year written notice (see further below under the heading “Notice of election”) to change to the national standard cost scheme was not given  ▪ value specified livestock under the cost price method when in the last income year the person used the national standard cost scheme and the required two-year notice (see further below under the heading “Notice of election”) to change to the cost price method was not given ▪ breach any determination made by the Commissioner under the national standard cost scheme by valuing livestock of the same type, class or other category under both the national standard cost scheme and any other valuation method ▪ reduce from one income year to the next the number of livestock of a particular class valued under the herd scheme (see ¶27264), unless the person has made a valid election for the next income year to value under the herd scheme all livestock of the type to which that class belongs ▪ value any male breeding livestock using a method other than the herd scheme where in the income year the person values any animals of that type under the herd scheme and values other animals of that type under the national standard cost scheme or the cost price option (see ¶27-264) ▪ value any livestock using a method other than the herd scheme where the herd scheme has been chosen for that particular livestock (see ¶27-264) ▪ value any bailed or leased livestock other than in accordance with specific rules (see ¶27-272), or ▪ contravene any other specific rule or requirement of any specified livestock valuation method. Notice of election Some elections require a notice to be given to the Commissioner. The type of elections and notice period are set out in s EC 11. Same year  Where notice must be given in the “same year”, notice of the election must be given to the Commissioner by the date on which the person furnishes the return of income for the income year in which the election is first to apply. For example, to move from the national standard cost scheme to the herd scheme in the 2018–19 income year, a written notice of election must be filed with the Commissioner by the date on which the 2018–19 tax return is filed. The following elections must be given in the same year: ▪ an election to value livestock of a particular type under the herd scheme ▪ an election to adopt a herd value ratio for livestock of any type when it is the first income year in which the particular livestock is valued under the herd scheme, and ▪ an election to change the valuation method from the herd scheme when a type of specified livestock ceases to be used for a breeding business but is instead used in a fattening business. Two years For the elections that must give at least two years notice, notice of the election must be given to the Commissioner by the date on which the person furnishes the return of income for the income year that is at least two income years before the income year in which the election is first to apply. For example, to move from the cost price method to the national standard cost scheme in the 2020–21 income year, a notice of election must be given to the Commissioner by the date on which the 2018–19 tax return is filed. The following elections must give at least two years notice: ▪ an election to stop valuing specified livestock of a particular type under the herd scheme, except when some livestock of that type continues to be valued under the herd scheme or when another valuation method is available  ▪ an election, after the herd scheme has been adopted, to adopt a herd value ratio or recalculated herd value ratio ▪ an election to change from the cost price method to the national standard cost scheme, and ▪ an election to change from the national standard cost scheme to the cost price method. Content of election notice A notice of election must state: ▪ the income year in which the election is to first apply ▪ the type, class, or other description of the applicable livestock ▪ the existing and the proposed valuation methods for the applicable livestock, and ▪ if the election is to use a herd value ratio or a recalculated herd value ratio (see ¶27-264): □ the assessed value of an average animal for each applicable class of livestock □ the date on which the valuation of each animal was made, and □ the name and address of the valuer. Once the Commissioner has been notified of an election, the election is irrevocable in relation to its first year of application. A valid election notice may not state more than one valuation method for a particular class of livestock. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 5, June 2004 at 41, “Questions we’ve been asked — Livestock valuation — election of method”. Invalid election  If a valuation election is ineffective because it is not within the restrictions (see above under heading “Restrictions”) and the person has not made a valid subsequent election in respect of that livestock and that income year, the valuation method to be applied shall, after consulting with the person, be determined by the Commissioner. Commissioner’s policy If an invalid election has been made by the person, the Commissioner will do one of the following: ▪ determine that the livestock valuation method to be applied by the person is the method actually used by the person — provided that the method used was a valid option at the time at which the invalid notice of election was filed. No further requests to change the valid valuation method used in the tax return (for the year in which the election is to be effective) will be accepted, or ▪ if the tax return for the year in which the election is to be effective has not yet been filed, the Commissioner will come to an agreement with the person on a different valuation method — provided that the method used is a valid option available to the person when the invalid notice of election was filed. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 5, June 2004 at 45, “Questions we’ve been asked — Livestock valuation — previous years’ invalid elections”. Law: IT07 ss EC 7–EC 11  HORSE BREEDING (BLOODSTOCK) ¶27-300 Background to bloodstock For tax purposes, “bloodstock” is defined to mean any horse that is a member of the standardbred or thoroughbred breed of horses. The definition encompasses a share or an interest in any such horse. A horse that does not come within this definition is dealt with under the  rules that relate to the valuation of non-specified livestock for tax purposes (¶27-280). Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶27-305 General principles of taxation of horse breeders There are two basic principles affecting the taxation of horse breeders. First, racing stakes or prize money are tax exempt, and there is no deduction for the costs of racing bloodstock, any associated racing expenditure or costs of preparing for racing. The only exceptions to the non-deductibility of costs incurred in relation to racing activities are for the race preparation costs of professional bloodstock breeders who do not race that bloodstock, and persons who incur such expenditure in exchange for income. A deduction of depreciation on a racehorse may be allowed where the animal is used in the production of a person’s income. Example 1: The purchase and racing of a horse by a construction company was for the purpose of promoting and advertising its business; any private enjoyment was incidental to that objective. The nexus between expenditure on the horse and the income-earning process could be attributed to the close liaison between the taxpayer and the racing industry in and about its home town. See Case M131 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,850.  The second basic principle is that breeding activities carried on as a hobby do not come within the scope of the Income Tax Act 2007. It is only where the activities are carried on as a business that the associated expenses will be deductible and the proceeds of sale from progeny will be income. Example 2: The taxpayer claimed that he was carrying on a hobby and that his activity was the racing of horses and breeding for that purpose. It was held that the profit received from the sale of two racehorses was assessable income. The horses were sold as part of the taxpayer’s business which included racing horses and breeding horses for  sale. The court noted that a special tax regime applied to horse racing as distinct from the business of horse or stud-horse breeding. The business and intention of the taxpayer went beyond simply racing or breeding horses for racing. See Edgecombe v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,140.  Changes from January 2019 With effect from 1 January 2019, changes were made to the bloodstock tax rules. The main change is that new investors are entitled to claim tax deductions and be taxable on receipts as though they had a bloodstock breeding business, if they: ▪ purchase, from a New Zealand premier yearling sale, an interest in a yearling that has the qualities to be a future stud-founding horse ▪ notify the Commissioner of Inland Revenue of their intention to breed from the yearling for profit in the future and provide the owners’ details, and ▪ provide evidence as required by the Commissioner to support their stated intention, including a business plan. The provisions set out the method for setting bright-line price thresholds for thoroughbred and standardbred yearlings to distinguish standout yearlings from other yearlings. The minimum price threshold for purchases from the Karaka or Christchurch 2021 sales were set at: ▪ $98,000 for standardbred yearling fillies ▪ $143,000 for standardbred yearling colts ▪ $422,000 for thoroughbred yearling fillies, and ▪ $337,000 for thoroughbred yearling colts.  If a horse is sold to overseas investors or exported without first racing or breeding in New Zealand, the greater of all previous deductions or its market value will be treated as income to the seller/exporter. This rule incentivises investors to undertake some racing activity in New Zealand before a standout horse is sold abroad or exported. Law: IT07 ss CG 8B, CG 8C, CW 60, DW 2, EC 39(2), EC 39B, EC 39C, EC 47B–EC 47E, EZ 6B  ¶27-310 Bloodstock used for racing Treatment in the accounts There are two situations to consider. Bloodstock unable to be used for breeding purposes at any future time In this event, the horse is deemed to be raced privately and not as part of the stud business. However, where the person gives the Commissioner notice that any horse used for racing is being used in the course of the conduct of a bloodstock breeding business, the horse will be treated as being raced for the business of breeding. The notice must be given within one month of the date on which the horse is first prepared for racing or is actually raced, whichever is the earlier. There is no discretion to accept a later notice. Bloodstock suitable for future breeding In this case, where the person is engaged in the business of breeding bloodstock for sale, the horse is deemed to have been raced as part of the stud business. The person is entitled to give the Commissioner notice stating that the horse is being raced for private purposes and not as part of the stud business. In that case, the horse is treated as being raced otherwise than as part of the stud’s business activities. Notice must be given within one month of the day on which the horse is first prepared for racing or the day on which it is first raced, whichever is the earlier. There is no discretion to accept a later notice.  These rules apply to all horses raced by the stud. Example: If the stud purchases a filly for racing with no intention of ever using it as part of the stud business, the horse will be deemed to be raced as part of the stud business unless the breeder gives the appropriate notice that the horse is being raced as a hobby.  Free stallion service The practice has developed in the racing industry for the winner of certain classic races to become entitled to make use of a free service from a particular stallion. Generally, the owner of the winning filly may choose between having one of the owner’s own broodmares served or selling the free service, although these choices are often made subject to the stud owner’s consent, because the stud owner may be concerned to know the quality of the broodmare’s bloodline. The treatment for tax purposes is as follows: ▪ the owner of the winning filly should debit the stud account and credit the racing account with the notional value of the free service when a live foal is born ▪ if the owner of the winning filly sells the free service, the proceeds of sale should be treated as part of the stake winnings, and ▪ the owner of the stallion is not required to make any accounting entries. Disposal at market value Where a stud ceases to use a horse for the purposes of the stud business, the horse is treated as having been disposed of on the day on which the horse was first used for that other purpose. The disposal price is the market value of the horse on that day. Where a horse that is not intended for the stud business is used for that purpose, the horse is treated as having been acquired by the  stud at its market value on the day on which the horse is first used for the stud business. Law: IT07 ss EC 46, EC 47  ¶27-315 Replacement bloodstock Receipts from the disposal of breeding bloodstock or from insurance payments for the loss, death, or permanent injury of such bloodstock are income. Bloodstock breeders can offset the cost of replacement breeding stock against any income derived from the following sources: ▪ disposal of breeding stock, or ▪ payments of insurance, indemnity or compensation for the loss or death of, or permanent injury to, any breeding stock. The amount offset is not income and reduces the cost base of the replacement animal. To offset the cost of replacement animals against any income, bloodstock breeders must apply to the Commissioner within six months after the end of the income year in which the breeding stock was disposed of, or within such further period as the Commissioner considers reasonable. The replacement animal must be acquired before an application is made. Where a bloodstock breeder receives insurance proceeds or other indemnity payments, the Commissioner has a discretion to extend the six-month period. Before this discretion may be exercised, the Commissioner must be satisfied on the following two points: ▪ there are valid commercial reasons for the delay in replacing the breeding stock, and ▪ the replacement animal was acquired within two income years following the end of the income year in which the loss, death or permanent injury occurred.  In these circumstances, the application must also be made within the two years following the end of the income year in which the loss, death or permanent injury occurred, or within such further time as the Commissioner allows. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 12, May 1994 at 5. Law: IT07 s EC 48  ¶27-320 Valuation of bloodstock Special rules apply to the valuation of bloodstock for income tax purposes. In broad terms, the cost of stallions and broodmares is written down to $1 by applying a “specified write-down” formula. Bloodstock can be written down if it is at least two years of age at the end of the income year. The bloodstock need not have been used for mating but merely purchased or owned with an intention of being used for such a purpose where the owner is in the business of breeding bloodstock (see Drummond v C of IR (2013) 26 NZTC ¶21023). The write-down is based on cost price but in some circumstances market value may be used if the value of the horse is reduced substantially, ie as a result of accident, birth deformity or infertility. Broodmares Broodmares not previously used for breeding in New Zealand are written down over a maximum of six years (if they start breeding at age two). Broodmares aged eight and over are written down in full in the year they are first used for breeding. In both cases, the writedown is accelerated by 25% pa. Broodmares that previously have been used for breeding in New Zealand are written down over a maximum of seven years (if they start breeding at age two). Broodmares aged eight and over are written down in full in the year they are first used for breeding. Writedowns for broodmares that previously have been used for breeding in New Zealand are based on cost price. Stallions  Stallions not previously used for breeding in New Zealand have an annual straight-line write-down of 50% of the cost price, unless the owner chooses to value the stallion using the reducing value method at the rate of 75%. Stallions that previously have been used for breeding in New Zealand are written down at the rate of 20% pa based on cost price. From 1 August 2007, the slower write down does not apply to shuttle stallions that have been previously used for breeding in New Zealand, if they are subsequently bought by a New Zealand breeder. GST and bloodstock The valuation of bloodstock is not affected by goods and services tax as regards cost price or market value. The cost price of bloodstock does not include input tax charged to the person at the time of supply. Nor is the tax included in the market value of bloodstock disposed of by the person. The supply of bloodstock of any age can be zero rated for export within 24 months of supply, provided Inland Revenue approval had been obtained. (The usual requirement is that goods must be exported within 28 days of supply.) Bloodstock owners must apply in writing to Inland Revenue enclosing a copy of the sale contract to gain the concession. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 91. Law: IT07 ss EC 38–EC 45  AQUACULTURE AND FISHING ¶27-350 Aquacultural development expenditure Certain expenditure incurred by a taxpayer running an aquacultural business is capitalised and amortised. The range of deductible expenditure is determined by the sort of business carried on by the aquaculturist. For improvements to an aquacultural business to be deductible, the business must be rock oyster farming, mussel farming, scallop farming, sea-cage salmon farming or freshwater fish farming.  The amount of the deduction is calculated using the formula: Schedule 20 percentage × diminished value The kinds of expenditure eligible for the progressive deduction and the appropriate percentage allowable as a deduction in each income year are set out in sch 20, pts B–F. The expenditure must be of benefit to the aquaculture business being conducted in the income year in which that expenditure was incurred. There is no deduction allowed in the income year in which the person ceases to carry on the business. A person working with aquaculture improvements that the person owns may claim a deduction for development expenses incurred either by the person or by any other person. This allows a deduction for expenses incurred by a previous owner. However, a current lessee may not claim a deduction if the expenditure was incurred by a previous lessee or owner. A person working with improvements that the person does not own may only claim for expenses incurred by the person alone. If an aquaculture improvement is destroyed or irreparably damaged and made useless for the purposes of deriving income, a deduction may be available for the diminished value of the improvement. Capital contributions A “capital contribution” is a payment received under an agreement that is to be applied towards the acquisition of “capital contribution property” under the terms of the agreement. Capital contribution property includes improvements for which expenditure is or would be deductible for the recipient under s DO 12 or DO 13 (this includes expenditure on aquacultural improvements as discussed above). Capital contributions received by a person are treated as income under s CG 8 in the year of receipt and the following nine years (see ¶5-356), unless the person elects to apply s DB 64. If s DB 64 is applied, the capital contribution will reduce the amount of the expenditure for the purposes of applying s DO 12 or DO 13 (see ¶10-200).  Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, DO 12, DO 13, sch 20, pts B–F  ¶27-365 Tax status of fishers There are a number of different arrangements under which fishers work on fishing boats. In each case it is necessary to ascertain the fisher’s status in order to establish the correct income tax and ACC obligations. For tax purposes it is necessary to ascertain whether the fisher is an employee or an independent contractor. This is because different tax consequences arise depending upon the classification of the fisher (see ¶3-376 for discussion of the rules to determine whether a person is an employee or an independent contractor). Fishers who are employees Fishers who have no other interest in the business apart from supplying their labour are usually employees for tax purposes. For example, deckhands are normally (but not always) considered to be employees. They are paid a wage and, in some instances, a percentage of the catch from each trip. Deckhands may be responsible for casting and hauling nets, lines or pots, and processing fish inshore or on deep-sea fishing vessels. Where an employment relationship exists, the employer is responsible for deducting the correct amount of PAYE and ACC from salary or wages paid to employees and forwarding this to Inland Revenue by the relevant due dates. Fishers who are employees are not allowed to claim any deductions for expenses incurred in earning their employment income. Fishers who are self-employed A person making payments to self-employed fishers for “labour-only fishing boat work” must deduct withholding tax. This deduction is at the rate of 20¢ in the dollar. Where a tax rate notification for contractors form (IR 330C) is not provided by a fisher, withholding tax must be deducted at the non-declaration rate of 45¢ in the dollar.  “Labour-only fishing boat work” is work of services under a contract, arrangement, or agreement for profit-sharing, which is exclusively or substantially for the supply of labour in connection with operating or maintaining a fishing boat that is required to be registered under s 103 of the Fisheries Act 1996. Self-employed fishers are responsible for filing any necessary income tax returns at the end of the year and to pay provisional tax during the year if necessary. Provisional tax can be paid using the standard (uplift) method, the estimation method or the GST ratio method. For fishers with fluctuating income, the GST ratio method may assist as it is designed to match provisional tax payments with cashflow. Self-employed fishers may also have to register for GST if a taxable activity is being carried on and the GST-registration threshold is exceeded. Basically, a self-employed fisher should consider their GST-registration status if the value of taxable supplies made in New Zealand in the course of carrying on a taxable activity exceeds or is expected to exceed $60,000 in any 12-month period. Employing non-resident fishers New Zealand-sourced salary or wage payments made to the foreign crew of chartered vessels are subject to PAYE at a flat rate of 10.5% provided that they remain non-residents for the duration of their New Zealand stay. This legislative amendment came about as a result of changes in the regulation of foreign vessels chartered by New Zealand entities to operate in New Zealand waters. The chartering of foreign vessels and crew is common by New Zealand entities that do not have sufficient resources to fish their quota. The tax changes mean that New Zealand-sourced income of foreign crew members is taxable in New Zealand and subject to PAYE. The flat 10.5% rate was chosen to reflect the level of income that is likely to be earned by such foreign crew members. The requirement to file end of year income tax returns has been removed to ease compliance costs for the foreign crew members.  To determine the amount of income that is sourced in New Zealand, the actual percentage of time spent within New Zealand’s “territorial limits” must be determined. “Territorial limits” includes the Territorial Sea, and the land. The Territorial Sea is the belt of coastal waters extending 12 nautical miles (22.2 km) from the New Zealand coast. Example: A foreign charter vessel with a non-resident fishing crew fishes within New Zealand’s Exclusive Economic Zone. They come within New Zealand’s territorial limits for 11.5 days (rounded to the nearest hour) out of every 31 days. If the crew members are paid monthly, the proportion of their monthly pay that is sourced in New Zealand and subject to tax is 11.5/31 or 37.1%. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014.  As alluded to above, the tax amendments were part of wider changes in the fishing industry that required foreign charter vessels to be flagged as New Zealand vessels from May 2016. As well as tax changes, there were changes in employment law in an attempt to eliminate human rights and labour abuse. Law: IT07 ss DA 2(3), RD 2, RD 4, RD 8, sch 4, pt E  ¶27-368 Deductions for repairs to fishing boats Normal rules are applied to determine the deduction of repair and maintenance expenditure in relation to fishing vessels. See ¶10-840. However, there is a special provision in relation to the deduction of the cost of repairs and alterations to the hull, equipment or machinery of any fishing boat when such a cost is incurred in making repairs or alterations required by Pt 19 or Pt 21 of the Maritime Rules made under the Maritime Transport Act 1994. A person carrying on a fishing business in New Zealand can spread the deduction of this type of expenditure over a five-year period. If the person ceases to carry on the fishing business before the end of that five-year period, the deduction may be spread over the period in which the business is carried on. To take advantage of the spreading, the fishing boat  must have been used wholly for the purposes of the fishing business. Note the specific definitions of “fishing boat” and “fishing business” in s EJ 2(6). Law: IT07 s EJ 2  ¶27-370 Fishing gear The purchase of fishing gear (eg nets, floats, lines, sweeps) must generally be capitalised and depreciated in accordance with the rates set by the Commissioner in various depreciation determinations.  ¶27-371 Fishing quotas In brief, the property rights in fishing quotas (individual transferable quotas or ITQs) are distinguished as “quota shares”, the property right, and “annual catch entitlement”, or ACE, the catching right. The ACE is often transferred between owners to create balanced packages of quotas for each owner to fish against. The transfer price or resource rental paid (based on the tonnage of fish which can be caught) is a revenue expense and is therefore deductible. Inland Revenue views quota shares as capital assets. Accordingly, the payments made on the sale of those shares are non-taxable to the seller and non-deductible to the purchaser. Profits from the sale of those shares may be assessable income of the seller if the seller is either in the business of dealing in them or if the shares have been acquired for the purpose of selling or otherwise disposing of them. Quota shares cannot be depreciated for tax purposes (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 3, March 2000, at 8). GST The sale of an ITQ is in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. See the High Court decision in Hibell v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,195. Therefore, the vendor is required to return output tax on the sale. If the purchaser is also GST-registered, he or she will be entitled to claim GST input tax on the purchase.  When fishing for species for which it holds quota, a fisher frequently catches other quota species (by-catch) for which it does not hold quota. A fisher can surrender by-catch, buy quota or pay deemed values. Deemed value payments are consideration for a taxable supply. See Pacific Trawling Ltd v Chief Executive of the Ministry of Fisheries (2005) 22 NZTC 19,204. Secondhand goods credit The Commissioner has released two public binding rulings on whether a GST-registered person can claim a secondhand GST input tax credit on the purchase of a fishing quota, or a coastal permit or certificate of compliance for the principal purpose of making taxable supplies. Briefly, the rulings provide as follows: ▪ No secondhand input tax credit may be claimed for the purchase of fishing quota (BR Pub 15/01 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 2, March 2015 at 3)). ▪ No secondhand input tax credit may be claimed for the purchase of a coastal permit or certificate of compliance (BR Pub 15/02 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 2, March 2015 at 3)). BR Pub 15/01 and BR Pub 15/02 apply to supplies made from 1 July 2014 for an indefinite period.  ¶27-375 Valuation of fishing catch The trading stock rules apply to the valuation of a fishing catch. See ¶9-010 et seq. A market value basis might be used in some cases and it can be determined by reference to the actual sale price contracted with the customer or the auction price on the day that the catch is sold. More commonly, a cost basis is used.  HORTICULTURE ¶27-380 Purchase of land and buildings for horticulture business  The cost of acquiring land is generally capital expenditure and therefore not deductible. Therefore, land purchased for the purposes of carrying on horticulture will be non-deductible in most cases. Expenditure incurred in borrowing money to make the purchase may be deductible. Where the land is leased, a deduction may also be available for the expenses incurred in preparation of the lease. The purchase of a building involves capital expenditure. However, the building may then be eligible for depreciation allowances. Determination PROV24: “Tax Depreciation Rates Provisional Determination Number PROV24” provides that specialised mushroom factories and buildings accounted for separately are depreciable property that has an estimated useful life of 33.3 years due to the wet and humid environment that is required for growing mushrooms. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 9, October/November 2012 at 7. Law: IT07 ss DB 5, DB 18  ¶27-385 Development expenditure for land improvements Certain types of expenditure on enhancements to land and for erosion, shelter and water protection plantings are allowed as a deduction under ss DO 1 and DO 2. In addition, an amortisation-type deduction for farming or agricultural land improvements is allowed under s DO 4. The application of all these sections is restricted to those persons actively engaged in the business of farming or agriculture. See ¶27-165 and ¶27-175. Law: IT07 ss DO 1, DO 2, DO 4  ¶27-387 Bird netting used by grape growers The Commissioner has issued two separate items in Tax Information Bulletins regarding the appropriate tax treatment for the costs of bird netting used by grape growers to protect ripening grapes from birds.  The first item, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 6, December 1995 at 21, concludes that netting of a cost of $12,000 and estimated to last for little more than a year is a deductible expense (under s DA 1) and not of a capital nature because: ▪ it does not increase the useful life of an asset ▪ it is a recurrent rather than a one-off expense, and ▪ it does not confer an enduring benefit on the taxpayer. However, the Commissioner has also issued a general depreciation determination (under s EE 25) concerning bird netting. The Commissioner has stated that so long as the netting in question lasts for only one year, it can be expensed. Otherwise, it must be capitalised and depreciated in accordance with the determination. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 7, July 1998 at 7.  ¶27-390 Purchase and planting of horticultural plants A summary of the income tax treatment of horticultural plants is set out below. ▪ Horticultural plants are classified either as “listed horticultural plants” or “non-listed horticultural plants” for tax purposes. ▪ The Commissioner can determine different amortisation rates for different plants to more accurately reflect a particular plant’s useful life. ▪ The Commissioner must take into account the estimated useful life of a plant when determining its amortisation rate. ▪ A deduction is allowed for expenditure on planting listed horticultural plants and non-listed horticultural plants. ▪ A deduction is allowed for replacement planting of listed horticultural plants.  The estimated useful life of a listed horticultural plant is the period of time over which the listed horticultural plant might reasonably be expected to be useful to a person in deriving income in or carrying on a business in New Zealand, with the expectation based on an assumption of normal and reasonable maintenance. A more detailed explanation of the regime that applies to listed horticultural plants is provided in ¶27-400 and ¶27-410. For discussion of the deduction allowed for expenditure on planting non-listed horticultural plants, see ¶27-175. Law: IT07 ss DO 5–DO 9, YA 1  ¶27-400 Deduction for planting of listed horticultural plants An amortisation deduction is allowed to a person in an income year for expenditure incurred by the person, or by another person, for planting a listed horticultural plant if all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ the person carries on a farming or agricultural business (including a horticultural business) on land in New Zealand ▪ the land is developed by planting listed horticultural plants on the land ▪ the development of the land benefits the business, and ▪ the person is entitled to a deduction for expenditure incurred on land developments. The deduction for the planting is available for expenditure incurred by the person or by another person. The deduction is not allowed in the income year in which the person disposes of the land (if the person owns the land) or the person ceases to carry on the farming or agricultural business (if the person does not own the land).  The term “planting” is defined in s DO 8 for the purposes of the deductions allowed under the rules for listed horticultural plants. Briefly, the term means one or more listed horticultural plants that form part of the business of the person during the income year and for which the person must account separately in the income year from other listed horticultural plants, if any, that form part of the person’s business. See further below under the heading “Accounting requirements”. Listed horticultural plant A “listed horticultural plant” is defined in s YA 1 as a horticultural plant, tree, vine, bush, cane or similar plant that is cultivated on land and is of a type listed in a determination made by the Commissioner. The term does not include trees planted mainly for the purpose of timber production, ornamental trees or vines planted mainly for the purpose of wine production. Amount of deduction The amount of the deduction is the diminished value of the expenditure incurred multiplied by the percentage rate determined by the Commissioner for the type of listed horticultural plant (see below under the heading “Commissioner’s determination”). A table of rates may be found in CCH, New Zealand Depreciation Rates. Broadly, the diminished value of the expenditure is the balance of the cost of the expenditure incurred after deducting the amortised amounts claimed in previous years. However, see further below for variations. If a listed horticultural plant ceases in an income year to exist or to be used in deriving assessable income and the person has no deduction for expenditure incurred in replacing the plant (see ¶27410), a deduction is allowed for the diminished value of the expenditure on the listed horticultural plant at the time that the plant ceased to exist or to be used in deriving assessable income for the income year. If a deduction is allowed for expenditure incurred on a replacement planting (see ¶27-410), the person may elect to increase the diminished value, at the end of the income year, of the expenditure  on listed horticultural plants that are in the planting at the end of the income year by the diminished value, immediately before the replacement, of the expenditure on a listed horticultural plant that is replaced. The person may also choose the method of making this increase. The election is made in the person’s tax return for the income year.  Accounting requirements If a person claims an amortisation deduction in an income year and the person has also claimed a deduction for replacement plantings (see ¶27-410) for either or both of the two immediately preceding income years, the person must account separately for the listed horticultural plants that: ▪ the person acquires in the income year ▪ benefit the person’s business in the income year, and ▪ are not replacement plants. If a person claims an amortisation deduction in an income year and the person has not claimed a deduction for replacement planting (see ¶27-410) for both of the two immediately preceding income years, the person may account for all of the listed horticultural plants as one planting. Capital contributions A “capital contribution” is a payment received under an agreement that is to be applied towards the acquisition of “capital contribution property” under the terms of the agreement. Capital contribution property includes improvements for which expenditure is or would be deductible for the recipient under s DO 5 or DO 6 (including expenditure on planting listed horticultural plants). Capital contributions received by a person are treated as income under s CG 8 in the year of receipt and the following nine years (see ¶5-356), unless the person elects to apply s DB 64. If s DB 64 is applied, the capital contribution will reduce the amount of the expenditure for the purposes of applying s DO 5 or DO 6 (see ¶10200). Commissioner’s determination The Commissioner has the power to determine what type of horticultural plant is to be a “listed horticultural plant” and also the  amortisation rate to be applied in calculating the amount of deduction allowed for the planting of that type of plant. When making the determination, the Commissioner is required to take into account the estimated useful life of the type of plant (ie the period of time over which the listed horticultural plant might reasonably be expected to be useful to a person in deriving income or carrying on a business, assuming normal and reasonable maintenance). The Commissioner also has the discretion to take into account the main purpose for which the type of plant is cultivated and the manner in which the type of plant is cultivated and managed. A notice of a determination made in relation to horticultural plants must be published in a publication chosen by the Commissioner within 30 days of the date of issue. A determination made in relation to horticultural plants may be disputed or challenged under the disputes resolution process. The Commissioner has issued Determination DET 05/01, “Amortisation rates for listed horticultural plants”. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 4, May 2005 at 11–17. The determination includes a discussion and flow chart of the process to be followed to have a horticultural plant classified as a “listed horticultural plant” or to have an amortisation rate for such a plant amended. Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, DO 5, DO 7, DO 8, YA 1; TAA s 91AAB  ¶27-410 Replacement planting of listed horticultural plants A deduction is allowed to a person for expenditure incurred in an income year for replacing a listed horticultural plant, provided all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ the person carries on a horticultural business on land in New Zealand  ▪ the person plants, causes to be planted, regrafts or causes to be regrafted on the land a listed horticultural plant as a replacement plant ▪ the replacement plant benefits the business ▪ the person does not dispose of the land on which the listed horticultural plant is cultivated, and ▪ the person elects to claim a deduction for replacement planting. The election to claim a deduction for replacement planting is made by adopting a tax position in a tax return for the current year. A “replacement plant” is defined in s YA 1 as a listed horticultural plant that replaces a listed horticultural plant, whether or not it is the same type of listed horticultural plant. “Planting” has the same meaning as for a deduction claimed under s DO 5 — see ¶27-400. Amount of deduction The amount of the deduction for replacement planting is dependent on whether or not the person has had a deduction for replacement planting in the two immediately preceding income years. A different calculation is provided for each case. No previous deduction If there has been no deduction allowed for either or both of the two immediately preceding income years, the amount of the deduction is calculated as follows: replacement expenditure × 7.5% ÷ fraction where: replacement expenditure is the amount of the expenditure incurred by the person in replacing the listed horticultural plant, and  fraction is the greater of 7.5% and the replaced area fraction for the planting for the current income year. Previous deduction If a person has had a deduction for replacement planting for both of the two immediately preceding income years, the amount of the deduction for the current income year is the smaller of two calculations. The first calculation is in accordance with the formula discussed above (ie the calculation for a person who has not had a deduction for replanting in the two immediately preceding income years). The second calculation is in accordance with the following formula: replacement expenditure × (15% − earlier fraction − later fraction) ÷ replaced area fraction where: replacement expenditure is the amount of expenditure incurred by the person earlier fraction is the lesser of 7.5% and the replaced area fraction for the planting for the earlier of the two income years preceding the current income year later fraction is the lesser of 7.5% and the replaced area fraction for the planting for the later of the two income years preceding the current income year, and replaced area fraction is the replaced area fraction for the planting for the current income year. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 1, February 2005 at 44 for background to the replacement planting rules. Capital contributions A “capital contribution” is a payment received under an agreement that is to be applied towards the acquisition of “capital contribution property” under the terms of the agreement. Capital contribution  property includes improvements for which expenditure is or would be deductible for the recipient under s DO 6. Capital contributions received by a person are treated as income under s CG 8 in the year of receipt and the following nine years (see ¶5-356), unless the person elects to apply s DB 64. If s DB 64 is applied, the capital contribution will reduce the amount of the expenditure for the purposes of applying s DO 6 (see ¶10-200). Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, DO 6, DO 8, DO 9, YA 1  ¶27-415 Plant variety rights Plant variety rights are defined to mean “proprietary rights granted for a plant variety under the Plant Variety Rights Act 1987 or similar rights given similar protection under the laws of a country or territory other than New Zealand”. Schedule 14, which lists intangible depreciable property, includes plant variety rights or the right to use such rights, thus allowing a New Zealand taxpayer to claim depreciation in respect of plant variety rights or rights secured offshore. See further at ¶13-560. The “royalty” definition in s CC 9(2) also includes a reference to plant variety rights in para (a). For the treatment of royalties, see ¶5-283. Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶27-420 Expenditure on bulbs and tubers Expenditure on bulbs and tubers for a flower farming business, including expenditure on acquiring a basic stock of bulbs with which to establish the business, has been held to be a deductible expense. In Case S38 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,255, all expenditure on bulbs and tubers was found to be expenditure for the purpose of gaining or producing assessable income and part of the flower farming process or activity rather than part of the structure on which the growing activity was based. On the valuation of nursery plants, see ¶27-500.  ¶27-445 Recurring annual costs for tending trees Until the trees reach fruit-bearing age, there will be expenditure in cultivating, pruning, spraying, rates, insurance, depreciation, and similar recurring annual charges. The expenses of tending the trees that have not reached fruit-bearing age, being annually recurring, are deductible notwithstanding that they were incurred to earn profit in future years.  ¶27-460 ENZA Ltd ENZA deducts certain statutory levies, such as horticultural levies, that are forwarded to the relevant body. Any levy paid through ENZA is an allowable deduction when there is no provision for repayment of the levy. ENZA charges growers a freight and storage charge when fruit is stored at ENZA-owned storage locations. This is an operational charge and is deductible by the grower.  ¶27-500 Valuation of nursery plants Generally, nursery plants that are trading stock must be valued at either market selling value or cost (ie the normal trading stock rules apply). See ¶9-010 et seq. As to whether plants are covered by the current definition of trading stock, see ¶9-010. In November 2001 Inland Revenue released an administrative interpretation on the valuation of nursery plants under the discounted selling price method. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 11, November 2001 at 68.  BEEKEEPING ¶27-505 Beekeeping farming or agricultural business  Inland Revenue accepts that beekeeping comes within the definition of an activity carried on for farming or agricultural purposes. Beekeepers, therefore, are given the same concessions that other farmers have, such as allowable deductions under s DO 1 (see ¶27175) and access to income equalisation schemes.  ¶27-510 Valuation of hives Ordinary commercial beekeeper hives are a capital asset and are not trading stock for the following reasons: ▪ The hives as housing have a semi-permanent nature in the same manner as farm buildings, even though the bees themselves have a life of only six to eight weeks. ▪ There is no ready market for bees as such, and it would not be economic for the beekeeper to raise additional colonies of bees for sale. ▪ It is a matter of fact that the ordinary commercial beekeeper does not engage in trading in bees or in hives. ▪ “Supers” and “bottom boards”, which comprise the hive buildings, are now generally purchased fully manufactured and are not constructed by the beekeeper.  FORESTRY AND MINING Forestry  ¶28-010  Mining  ¶28-053  Petroleum Mining  ¶28-120  FORESTRY ¶28-010 Forestry — background The tax issues associated with any forestry investment or activity can be divided into several identifiable stages: ▪ the deductibility of pre-investment expenditure, eg consultant’s fees: see ¶28-026 ▪ whether the costs of land and timber acquisition can be claimed as a deduction: see ¶28-024 ▪ the deductibility of the costs of land preparation: see ¶28-027 ▪ the deductibility of costs associated with tree planting and maintenance (eg pruning and thinning): see ¶28-040 ▪ how to return profits arising on the sale of timber and rights in timber: see ¶28-014 and ¶28-015, and ▪ the deductibility of post-harvest expenditure, eg cleaning up and de-stumping. The basic rule relating to the taxation of a forestry activity is that any amount derived from disposing of timber or disposing of a right to take timber is income of a person. A person is also allowed a deduction for the cost of timber, provided certain conditions are met.  See ss CB 24 and DP 11 and ¶28-014 and ¶28-024. Income derived from the subdivision or development of forestry land might come within the exemption from income under s CB 21. See ¶28-017. Planting, maintenance and associated costs are allowed as a deduction in the income year incurred. See ¶28-040. History of the development of the forestry regime There have been a number of different regimes applied to the taxation of forestry since 1962. These include: ▪ a capital forestry encouragement loan scheme ▪ a forestry encouragement grant scheme ▪ full deductibility of forestry expenditure ▪ capitalisation of certain expenditure to a “cost of bush account”, and ▪ the current regime of full deductibility of forestry planting and maintenance expenditure. For more detail on these regimes see CCH, 2002 New Zealand Master Tax Guide at ¶28-010, and Tax Education Office Newsletter No 148, 18 June 1998.  ¶28-014 Disposals of timber — income An amount derived from disposing of timber or a right to take timber is income of a person, whether or not the person owns the land on which the timber is situated. For there to be income there needs to be a disposition and “dispose” is defined widely to include granting a licence or easement, granting or creating a right to take timber, and creating a forestry right (other than a right in favour of the proprietor). Forestry rights are discussed at ¶28-020.  Also, if a person disposes of land with standing timber on it, the amount derived from the standing timber is income of the person, unless the timber is one of the following kinds: ▪ trees that are ornamental or incidental as evidenced by a certificate given under s 44C of the Tax Administration Act 1994, or ▪ trees that are subject to a forestry right (as defined in s 2 of the Forestry Rights Registration Act 1983) registered under the Land Transfer Act 2017, or ▪ trees subject to a removal right (profit à prendre) granted before 1 January 1984. Standing timber does include immature trees as well as mature trees. If the disposal of land with standing timber is income to a person under s CB 25, that amount of income to the vendor is also used as the basis for establishing the cost of timber for the purchaser. The income derived from disposing of timber, the right to take timber or standing timber is offset by a deduction for the cost of the timber. Deductions are discussed at ¶28-024. Income and deduction spreading provisions are discussed at ¶28016. Law: IT07 ss CB 24, CB 25, DP 10(1), YA 1; TAA s 44C  ¶28-015 Dispositions of timber treated at market value Timber or a right to take timber is treated as trading stock and deemed to be sold at market value where the sale of the timber or timber rights is made: ▪ together with other assets, or ▪ for no consideration or at an under value.  The vendor is treated as deriving an amount equal to the market value of the timber at the time of disposal. The purchaser will be treated as having incurred that amount as expenditure in acquiring the timber. Timber, standing timber or a right to take timber is also treated as being disposed of at market value on the transfer of the property under the following transactions: ▪ transfer of a person’s estate to an administrator or executor on the death of the person ▪ distribution by an administrator, executor or trustee of an estate to a beneficiary under a will or an intestacy ▪ distribution by a trustee of a trust to a beneficiary ▪ in specie distribution by a company caused by a shareholding ▪ a gift, or ▪ a resettlement of a trust. With the exception of the first transaction listed above, the distribution, gift or resettlement is treated as having taken place at market value on the date the transaction occurs. In the case of the transfer of a person’s estate to an administrator or executor, the transaction is treated as if the transfer at market value occurred on the day immediately before the date of death. Transfer to a close relative When timber, standing timber or a right to take timber is transferred under either of the first two transactions listed above, the disposal will be treated as a transfer under a relationship agreement, where the forestry asset is transferred to a close relative of the deceased person. A close relative means the surviving spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner of the deceased, or a person who is within the second degree of relationship to the deceased (for  example, the children, siblings or grandchildren). See discussion of transfers under a relationship agreement at ¶28-018. Law: IT07 ss DP 10(2), EB 24, FC 1, FC 2, FC 6, GC 1, GC 2, YA 1  ¶28-016 Spreading of income and deductions Income derived from disposing of timber, standing timber or the right to take timber need not all be returned as assessable income for the income year the timber is disposed of. The vendor can choose to allocate the income between the income year of derivation and any one or more of the previous three income years. If the vendor chooses to allocate the income, the deduction for the cost of timber must also be spread to the same income years and in the same proportions. To take advantage of this concession, the person must apply to the Commissioner within one year after the end of the income year in which the income is derived, see s EI 1(3). ▸ Note: Where an application to spread income to a previous year should have been made between 25 March and 30 June 2020, ie for income years ending between 25 March and 30 June 2019, the Commissioner has exercised her discretion under s 6I of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to make a statutory variation because of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and extended the date by which the application must be received to 31 July 2020. See COV 20/02, “Variation to section EI 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 4) and COV 20/06, “Variation to section EI 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 24). Section 120P of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) provides a safeguard (until the terminal tax date for the current tax year) from adverse use of money interest implications for the prior years to which the income is allocated. In terms of late payment penalty implications, the Commissioner is required to set a new due date for payment of the increased tax. See s 142A of the TAA. Late payment penalties would only apply where the taxpayer did not pay the increased tax by the new due date. The Commissioner’s policy is to set a new due date two months from the date of assessment. A  factor to be considered when making an application under s EI 1 is that the earlier in the one-year application period the application is made, the earlier payment of the increased tax will be required. Law: IT07 ss EI 1, EJ 1; TAA ss 120P, 142A  ¶28-017 Subdivision or development of forestry land An interpretation statement addresses the question whether amounts derived from the subdivision or development of forestry land were assessable income under s CD 1(2)(f) and (g) of the Income Tax Act 1994 (ss CB 12 and CB 13 of the Income Tax Act 2007). The Commissioner concluded the exemption under s CD 1(7) of the Income Tax Act 1994 (s CB 21 of the Income Tax Act 2007) could apply to forestry land because forestry could be considered to be a “farming or agricultural business”. Any amount derived would not constitute assessable income so long as the following requirements were fulfilled: ▪ the land sold is the result of the subdivision of a block of land that the vendor, immediately before the subdivision, occupied or used primarily or principally for farming or agricultural business ▪ the land sold is of an area and nature that is currently capable of being worked as an economic unit in a farming or agricultural business, and ▪ the land is disposed of primarily and principally to be used in a farming or agricultural business. The interpretation statement (“ ‘Forestry’: whether or not it is included in the section CD 1(7) definition of ‘farming or agricultural business’ ”) is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 4, April 1988 at 43. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13, CB 21  ¶28-018 Transfer of timber under relationship agreement  Where timber, the right to take timber, or land with standing timber is transferred under a relationship agreement, the transfer is treated as if it were a disposal and acquisition for a consideration equal to the total cost of timber or right to take timber to the transferor at the date of transfer. This amount is taken into account in calculating the income derived by the transferor and in calculating the cost of the timber to the transferee. Effectively, this means that no liability is created in the hands of the transferor at the time of transfer because he or she is treated as having disposed of the timber for an amount equal to its cost. The deemed cost to the transferee is the basis upon which the assessable profit, if any, is calculated when the transferee subsequently disposes of the timber. These principles do not apply to the transfer of land which has ornamental or incidental trees on it. Trees of that kind do not give rise to a taxable profit or gain. Law: IT07 ss DP 10(2), FB 6, FB 7  ¶28-019 Compensation for logging cessation Crown compensation paid in consequence of a government ban on the logging and sale of native timber was assessable in Case S104 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,662. However, the Taxation Review Authority rejected a bid to have the payment assessed under s 74(2)(b) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (the equivalent of s CB 24 of the Income Tax Act 2007) and to claim a deduction for the cost of the timber under the proviso to that section (now s DP 11). There had been no sale or disposition of the timber and no grant of any rights to take profits from the land. The compensation was considered to have replaced the income that would have arisen had the timber been harvested and was therefore assessable income under the business income and royalty provisions, but not the s CB 24 equivalent as argued. See also Case T47 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,319.  ¶28-020 Forestry rights  The Forestry Rights Registration Act 1983 defines a “forestry right” as a right granted in accordance with that Act. Briefly, an owner or lessee of land can create a forestry right by creating, granting or reserving the right to establish, maintain and harvest or to maintain and harvest a crop of trees on the land. The forestry right may also grant or reserve rights of access and rights of construction and use of tracks, culverts, bridges, buildings and other works and facilities if those rights are ancillary to and necessary for the purposes of the rights created. In addition, the forestry rights may provide for charges, payments, royalties or division of the crop or the proceeds of the crop. Although a forestry right falls short of a right of exclusive possession, it can be registered against the title to the land pursuant to the Land Transfer Act 2017. Where a registered right contains a covenant, this becomes binding upon the successors in title, unless the parties agree otherwise. The grant, creation or assignment of a forestry right is a disposition of a right to take timber and is therefore taxable. The only exception is where the owners of the land grant themselves a forestry right (under s 2A(3) of the Forestry Rights Registration Act). Land owners who create a forestry right for themselves do not incur a tax liability when they do so. Small forestry owners can, therefore, sell their land but retain ownership of their trees without creating adverse tax consequences.  ¶28-021 Treaty of Waitangi claim settlements: rights to take timber Exempt income arises when a forestry right is extinguished and regranted in whole or in part solely to facilitate a Treaty of Waitangi claim settlement process. The new rights are treated as having been acquired for a cost equal to the expenditure incurred in relation to the old right. This will apply only to the extent that the expenditure relates to the land covered by the new right and to the extent that it has not been deducted previously.  When a person is entitled to the exempt income treatment, detailed above, the deemed cost of the new right does not give rise to a deduction under the cost of timber rules in s DP 11. Law: IT07 ss CW 1B, DP 9B, DP 11  ¶28-022 GST on sale of forestry rights The Commissioner issued a binding public ruling, BR Pub 07/01, on the subject of when the recipient of a forestry right will be able to claim a secondhand goods GST input tax credit. Essentially, the ruling confirms that the grant of a forestry right is a supply of secondhand goods if at least one prior owner has exercised his or her right of removing trees from the land. The original grant of a forestry right cannot be a supply of secondhand goods. The ruling applies for an indefinite period from 1 October 2006 and is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 4. Law: GST s 20(3)  ¶28-023 Income equalisation schemes and forestry business The income equalisation schemes are dealt with in subpart EH. See ¶27-065. Individuals carrying on a forestry business are entitled to use the main farm income equalisation provisions. The maximum amount that can be paid into the main income equalisation account is the net income for the tax year, calculated by reference to income from the sale of any standing or fallen timber or the proceeds from the right to cut or remove that timber. It applies only to timber that has been felled and not further processed. In addition to the main income equalisation scheme for forestry companies there is a limited income equalisation scheme for proceeds from thinning operations. Proceeds from the sale of cutting rights are not eligible. See also ¶27-085.  The definition of “income from forestry” in s EH 34(1) includes permanent forest sink initiative (PFSI) forestry income and, from 23 June 2020, income from a permanent forestry scheme, so that PFSI foresters have been entitled to use income equalisation accounts from the beginning of the 2008–09 income year. Law: IT07 ss EH 3, EH 34, EH 35, EH 63  ¶28-024 Deductions — cost of timber In general, where the disposition of timber gives rise to taxable income, a deduction is allowed against that income for the cost of the timber under s DP 11. The cost of timber includes: ▪ expenditure incurred by the person in relation to timber: □ before harvest, for a disposal of harvested timber □ before the disposal of the timber or the relevant right, for a disposal of standing timber, a right to take timber, a licence or easement for timber, or a forestry right ▪ expenditure on planning, planting and growing the timber, and ▪ expenditure incurred in creating or granting a right to take timber, a licence or easement for timber or a forestry right. The cost of timber excludes: ▪ any expenditure to the extent it is an allowable deduction under any section other than s DP 11 ▪ expenditure to which s DB 46 (Avoiding, remedying or mitigating effects of discharge of containment or making of noise) applies, and ▪ an amount allowed as a deduction under s DQ 4 (Environmental restoration accounts scheme).  Where a market value is deemed for the consideration for a disposal (see ¶28-015), that market value is also deemed to be the purchase price for the buyer of the timber or the right to take timber, and therefore forms part of the cost of the timber. Expenditure is deductible as the cost of timber is not subject to the capital limitation. The income year in which the deduction may be allocated is dependent on whether the timber extracted is trading stock, as defined, or revenue account property. If the property is trading stock, the deduction is allocated to the first income year the property becomes trading stock (eg the first year in which it is bought for resale). If the property is not trading stock, it is revenue account property and the deduction will be allocated to the earlier of the income year in which the property is disposed of and the income year in which the property ceases to exist. Law: IT07 ss DB 23, DP 10(1), DP 11, EA 2, YA 1  ¶28-025 Disposal of timber to associated person Where timber or the right to take timber or standing timber is disposed of to an associated person, the deduction for the cost of timber is limited to the proceeds of sale which are included in income. Where the proceeds of a sale to an associated person are exceeded by the deductible cost of the timber, the excess is transferred to the purchaser. The cost of the timber to the associate is the total of the cost of timber to that person and any amount which the seller of the timber has not been able to deduct (because it exceeded the amount of the sale proceeds). See CCH, Tax Guide to Farming, Forestry and Fishing, para 9.2.3. Law: IT07 s DP 10(3)–(5)  ¶28-026 Pre-investment expenditure for forestry business  Consultants’ fees and the costs of feasibility studies, in common with any pre-business-commencement expenditure, are considered not to fall within the specific forestry expenditure provision under s DP 1. See Tax Education Office Newsletter No 148, 18 June 1998 at 3. However, if those costs are incurred by the person during the course of the person’s existing forestry undertaking, then a deduction might be allowed under the general permission. Two overseas cases support this principle: Bowater Power Co Ltd v M of NR 71 DTC 5469 and Griffin Coal Mining Co Ltd v FC of T 90 ATC 4870. See Tax Education Office Newsletter No 148, 18 June 1998 at 3. Costs of purchasing land and timber No deduction is available for the cost of forestry land or associated legal, valuation or holding costs on the basis that such expenditure is of a capital nature and thus precluded from deductibility. Furthermore, such costs cannot be capitalised and depreciated. This position is to be contrasted with the situation where the land purchased includes standing timber. As mentioned at ¶28-014, the portion of the purchase price related to that standing timber is treated as the cost of timber for the purchaser and, consequently, offset against gross proceeds received on a subsequent sale. See also Tax Education Office Newsletter No 148, 18 June 1998 at 4.  ¶28-027 Forest land development costs Schedule 20, pt G A depreciation-type deduction is allowed, under s DP 3, for forest land development expenditure incurred on the kinds of costs listed in sch 20, pt G (set out in ¶50-165 — Depreciation rates guide). Generally, this expenditure relates to the clearing and preparation of land for planting, improving the land and the construction of access roads for use for more than 12 months. The expenditure must be incurred on making the improvement and in developing the land. It must also be expenditure that is of benefit to the forestry business. The deduction allowed under s DP 3 is non-recoverable where the improvements are sold for more than their adjusted tax book value.  No deduction is allowed for the income year in which the person disposes of the forest land or ceases to carry on a forestry business on the land. No adjustment needs to be made for expenditure incurred part-way through a year. That is, a full-year deduction is available even if the expenditure is incurred on the last day of the financial year. This is provided that the expenditure is “of benefit” to the business in that income year. A taxpayer who is eligible for a deduction under s DP 3 cannot claim a deduction under the depreciation regime. Expenses not included in sch 20, pt G must be capitalised to a cost of forest account and deducted from the proceeds of sale as part of the cost of the timber. Person who owns the land Provided the expenditure incurred is of benefit to the forestry business in that income year, s DP 3 applies to persons who own the land on which they carry on their forestry business. A deduction is allowed in respect of the unexpired expenditure incurred by the previous owners of the land. It is also possible that s DP 3 applies to persons who have a leasehold interest in land, as well as to those who have a freehold interest. Person who does not own land Similarly, provided the expenditure incurred is of benefit to the forestry business in that income year, s DP 3 applies to persons who carry on their forestry business on land not owned by them. The deduction allowed in this case is restricted to depreciation on expenditure incurred by that person. The person cannot claim depreciation on the unexpired expenditure incurred by a previous owner. Improvements destroyed or made useless A deduction is also allowed for the diminished value of expenditure on land improvements used for forestry that have been amortised in  accordance with s DP 3 and sch 20, and that are destroyed or irreparably damaged and made useless. See s DP 4. Law: IT07 ss DP 3, DP 4, sch 20, pt G  ¶28-030 Forest expenditure (planting and maintenance) deductions A range of deductions for planting and maintenance are allowed for persons carrying on a forestry business in New Zealand. Carrying on a forestry business A passive investor who merely puts up the equity to enter a forestry partnership might not be carrying on a forestry business. The conclusion from the following cases is that, where a forestry partnership is being promoted to obtain the deductions under s DP 1 the partnership agreement must reflect the fact that the participant is carrying on a business. Example 1: A company was held not to be in a forestry business where: “the carrying out of a profit-making scheme or undertaking means the carrying on or out by the taxpayer or on his behalf … To enter into a contract to provide a specific sum … and then to await results cannot in my opinion be properly described as carrying on or carrying out a scheme or undertaking”. See Pukepine Sawmills Ltd v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,695.  Example 2: “… the right to direct the employment of a forester or consultant and the right to receipt of regular management reports. Bisley was also entitled to the grown trees …”. This case held in the taxpayer’s favour. See AM Bisley & Co Ltd v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,082.  Allowable deductions Forestry expenditure The following deductions are allowed under s DP 1(1):  ▪ rent, rates, insurance premiums, administrative overheads or other expenses of the same kind ▪ weed control (excluding releasing), pest control, disease control and fertiliser application undertaken after the planting of the trees ▪ interest on money borrowed for the purposes of the forestry business and employed as capital in the business ▪ planting or maintaining trees on the land ▪ repairs or maintenance of plant, machinery or equipment used mainly in: □ planting or maintaining trees on the land, or □ preparing or otherwise developing the land for the person’s forestry operations ▪ repairs or maintenance of land improvements (other than trees) effected on the land and used by the person mainly in the forestry business ▪ the construction to or on the land of access tracks that are constructed for a specific operational purpose and used for no longer than 12 months after construction, and ▪ the cost of standing timber that is lost or destroyed. Although timber is revenue account property, deductions for the above types of expenditure are allocated to the income year they are incurred and not in accordance with s EA 2(2) (Other revenue account property). With respect to a deduction for the loss or destruction of standing timber, any insurance or compensation proceeds received for the loss or destruction of the standing timber is income under s CG 6.  The deductibility of other types of forestry expenditure (not listed above) is determined under the general permission. Land contouring The cost of land contouring incurred in the course of deriving income under s CB 24 (Disposal of timber or right to take timber) or CB 25 (Disposal of land with standing timber) is not deductible. Timber cost Expenditure already allowed as a deduction, such as current year deductions, cannot form part of the cost of timber or the cost of forest and be deductible again when the timber or forest is sold. See s DP 11 and ¶28-024. Similarly, the depreciation allowance deductible annually by s DP 2 cannot form part of the cost of timber and be claimed as a cost of forest deduction against the income from the sale of the timber. Law: IT07 ss DP 1, DP 2, DP 7, DP 11  ¶28-035 Cost of bush expenditure From the 1986–87 to the 1990–91 income years, the costs of planting, maintaining and tending trees were capitalised to an account usually referred to as a “cost of bush” account. The amount capitalised was carried forward and allowed as a deduction when the timber was eventually sold. Planting and maintenance expenditure incurred from the 1991–92 income year is deductible on a current-year basis. However, forestry owners still need to maintain a cost of bush account to cover planting and maintenance expenditure incurred before the 1991–92 income year and also to cover any additional standing timber acquired since March 1991 — that is, a forester will establish a cost of bush account if an existing forest is purchased. Expenditure in relation to that forest will not be deductible until the timber is sold. Allocation of cost of bush account  Those forestry operations in existence as at 1 April 1991 had a cost of bush account operating on one of the following bases: ▪ A stand-by-stand basis: each stand of trees had its own cost of bush account. These stands were normally categorised according to the year of planting, location, soil type, etc. ▪ An annual planting basis: each year’s total planting had its own cost of bush account, that is, all the costs incurred with the annual planting in any particular year were pooled into an annual cost of bush account. ▪ A total forest basis: this method was used by smaller forestry businesses operating 40 hectares or less of total forest planting. Such a business was entitled to operate a single cost of bush account applying to the whole of the forest. Where a single cost of bush account is being operated, the deduction allowed in any particular year is based on the formula: total forest area felled during the income year  the balance in the cost of bush account at the total forest area remaining at × beginning of the income the beginning of the income year year Where a stand or annual planting basis is being operated by a business, the deduction allowed in any particular year is based on the formula: quantity of timber in annual planting or stand cut during the income year  the balance in the cost of bush account at the × beginning of the income total quantity of timber or year stand at the beginning of the income year  ¶28-040 Farmers’ expenditure on tree planting A limited deduction is provided under s DO 3 for expenditure incurred by farmers in planting or maintaining trees on the land. To apply, the farming or agricultural business must be the principal business carried on, on the land. The deduction cannot exceed $7,500. If a farmer is in a forestry business, however, it would appear that deductions for planting and maintenance expenditure could be claimed under s DP 1 where there is no limit to the amount of the deduction allowed. Deduction under both sections for the same expenditure is prohibited by s BD 4(5). For further detail, see ¶27015. Law: IT07 s DO 3  ¶28-050 Forestry business based partly on the use of Māori land Tax concessions and special rules may apply to a forestry business based partly on the use of Māori land. The provisions may apply when a forestry company, under an agreement made between the Crown, Māori landowners and a holding company (a company associated with the forestry company), is incorporated to carry on a forestry business. The business must use land sold to the forestry company in part by the Crown, Māori landowners or the holding company. Standing timber Standing timber on land sold to a forestry company in these circumstances gives rise to exempt income under s CW 1. When the forestry company eventually cuts this standing timber, the deduction for cost is limited to the lesser of: (i) the cost of timber to the vendor at the time of sale to the forestry company; and (ii) the sale price attributed to the standing timber sold to the forestry company. Shares and debentures  Forestry company shares and debentures issued to Māori are held by a Māori investment company in which the shares and debentures are in turn owned by the original Māori landowners. Special tax rules apply to “qualifying” debentures issued in respect of: ▪ any unpaid purchase money for land acquired by the forestry company from the Crown, Māori owners, or a holding company ▪ any money lent by a holding company to the forestry company to finance the planting and maintaining of trees, administrative overheads, rates, rent, insurance premiums or similar expenses and payments of interest, and ▪ any capitalised interest, being interest derived from any qualifying debenture. The tax position is as follows. ▪ Interest payable on qualifying debentures is exempt from tax to the extent it is paid by the issue of further qualifying debentures, either in the forestry company or the Māori investment company. See s CW 3. ▪ This exempt interest is not deductible by either company. See s DP 8(1) and (2). ▪ Section FA 2B (Stapled debt securities) does not apply to qualifying debentures. See s DP 8(3). Law: IT07 ss CW 1, CW 3, DP 8, DP 9, YA 1  MINING ¶28-053 Mining — background For the 2013–14 and earlier income years, the various aspects of mining activities were dealt with under a complex series of provisions. These provisions applied when the company’s only or  main source of income was from the mining of any specified mineral (not petroleum), or when the only or main activity of the company was prospecting for any specified mineral. In more general terms, an amount derived from the disposal of minerals taken from land was income and the cost of a non-specified mineral was an allowable deduction, subject to general limitations. From the 2014–15 income year For the 2014–15 and later income years, the previous highly concessionary rules were replaced with provisions designed to more closely align the treatment of specified mineral miners with that of taxpayers more generally, while accommodating some of the more unique aspects of the mineral mining industry. The main changes included: ▪ immediate deductibility of prospecting and exploration expenditure, with some clawback rules for exploration expenditure that results in an asset used in commercial production ▪ tax deductions for development expenditure to be spread over the assumed life of the mine ▪ mining rehabilitation expenditure to be deductible in the year it is paid ▪ mineral extraction expenditure to be taxed under ordinary capital/revenue rules ▪ revenue account treatment for land acquired for the mining operations or associated mining operations, and ▪ standard depreciation rules for assets whose useful life is independent of the life of the mine. The discussion in the following paragraphs considers the provisions applying from the 2014–15 income year. For a discussion of the taxation of mining companies under those provisions applying prior  to the 2014–15 income year, see CCH, New Zealand Master Tax Guide 2014.  ¶28-055 Mineral miner The rules apply to all “mineral miners”. The definition of a “mineral miner” is no longer restricted only to mining companies. The rules therefore apply to all persons: ▪ whose only or main source of income is the business of mining listed industrial minerals (specified minerals under the former rules) in New Zealand, or ▪ whose only or main activity, or proposed activity, is exploring, searching or mining for a listed industrial mineral in New Zealand or performing development work for those purposes. Work done on a service for reward basis does not make a person a mineral miner unless the reward is dependent on the production of the mineral or the participation of profits from the mineral’s production. Law: IT07 ss CU 6, CU 8  ¶28-060 Income of a mineral miner Amounts derived by a mineral miner from their mining operations or associated mining operations are income of the mineral miner. Under the rules, “mining operations” cover exploring or searching for minerals, performing development work, extracting minerals, mining and other work directly related to mining. “Associated mining operations” cover activities carried on in association with mining and consist of accumulation, initial treatment and transport of minerals up to a stage where they are saleable or ready to be processed or used in manufacturing operation. In addition, an amount derived on the disposal of land, or an interest in land, acquired by a mineral miner for their mining operations or  associated mining operations is income of the mineral miner where the land is, or forms or is intended to form part of, a mining permit area or land adjacent to it. Consideration derived on the disposal of: ▪ a mining or prospecting right ▪ an exploration, prospecting or mining permit, or ▪ a share or partial interest in one of the above is also income of a mineral miner. The exception to this is in the case of a farm-out arrangement. The provision dealing with farm-out arrangements and petroleum mining has been extended to apply to mineral mining. Farm-in expenditure under a farm-out arrangement is excluded income of the mineral miner that is the farm-out party. Clawback of exploration expenditure The government recognises that expenditure will be incurred that, at the time, may be exploration or development expenditure, with its true categorisation only becoming apparent in hindsight. To deal with these situations, a recovery or clawback rule applies to expenditure that is deducted as exploration expenditure but which actually results in an asset that is used for commercial production, and the mineral miner is treated as deriving income. For the clawback rule to apply, the following criteria must be met: ▪ the expenditure is treated as exploration expenditure ▪ the mineral miner is allowed a deduction for it ▪ the year is later than the 2013–14 income year ▪ the expenditure is incurred in an income year for which the mineral miner is required to keep records ▪ the expenditure results in an asset, and  ▪ the miner uses that asset for or in relation to the commercial production of a mineral. The amount of income is the amount of expenditure that produced the asset, although it is capped at the amount of the deduction taken. The income is allocated to the income year in which the relevant asset is used in commercial production. For these purposes, commercial production means the extraction of a listed industrial mineral from a permit area and the production of the mineral in commercial quantities on a continuing basis to a stage at which it is in a saleable form and suitable location for delivery to a buyer, consumer, processor or user. Law: IT07 ss CU 1, CU 2, CU 3, CU 4, CU 7, CU 9, CX 43  ¶28-065 Deductions for a mineral miner Most expenditure of a mineral miner must be divided into the following categories, dependent on the phase of the mine in question: ▪ mining prospecting expenditure (see ¶28-070) ▪ mining exploration expenditure (see ¶28-075) ▪ mining development expenditure (see ¶28-080), and ▪ mining rehabilitation expenditure (see ¶28-085). Other types of expenditure are: ▪ expenditure on land (see ¶28-090) ▪ expenditure on the acquisition of mineral mining assets (see ¶28095), and ▪ all other expenditure (see ¶28-100).  All of the main types of expenditure are treated as mutually exclusive — each category specifically excluding any amounts that fall within another category. As expenditure will generally relate to a “permit area”, the definition of that term has been expanded to include mineral mining activities. Law: IT07 subpart DU  ¶28-070 Mining prospecting expenditure Mining prospecting expenditure of a mineral miner is immediately deductible. “Mining prospecting expenditure” is defined to mean expenditure incurred directly in relation to the acquisition of a prospecting right or mining prospecting information, including labour, materials, services and administration expenses directly incurred in acquiring the information. The term includes prospecting for minerals by electrical, geochemical, gravimetric, magnetic, radioactive, seismic or other geological methods. “Mining prospecting information” is defined to mean geological, geophysical or technical information that is about the presence, absence, extent or volume of minerals in an area, or likely to assist in determining this. Specifically excluded from “mining prospecting expenditure” are the costs of land, plant or machinery, expenditure that falls into one of the other main classes of expenditure and residual expenditure. Plant and machinery acquired is subject to the general capital/revenue distinction. To the extent they are capital and depreciable, they will be subject to the normal depreciation rules at the appropriate rate. Law: IT07 ss DU 1, DU 9  ¶28-075 Mining exploration expenditure  Mining exploration expenditure is also immediately deductible, except when the clawback rule discussed in ¶28-060 applies. Where the clawback rule applies, the exploration expenditure is effectively reclassified as mining development expenditure and subject to the spreading rule for that type of expenditure, discussed in ¶28-080. “Mining exploration expenditure” means expenditure that a mineral miner incurs in exploring or searching in New Zealand for minerals, and includes expenditure the miner incurs directly in relation to: ▪ acquiring an exploration right or permit ▪ geological mapping and geophysical surveys ▪ systematic searches for areas containing minerals ▪ searching by drilling in areas containing minerals, and ▪ searching for ore containing minerals within or in the vicinity of an ore body by crosscuts, drilling, drives, rises, shafts or winzes. The term does not include the cost of land, plant or machinery, expenditure that falls into one of the other main categories, and residual expenditure. Law: IT07 ss DU 1, DU 10  ¶28-080 Mining development expenditure Mining development expenditure is capitalised and deducted over the life of the mine. Mining development expenditure means: ▪ expenditure incurred in preparing a permit area for mining operations or associated mining operations, or ▪ expenditure on operations that are carried out on a permit area for deriving income and consist of mining, performing work  directly related to mining or earthworks, including tailing dams, that are necessary for working the mine. In either case, the expenditure must relate to a permit area. There are a number of specific inclusions for expenditure incurred in: ▪ acquiring a mining right or permit ▪ obtaining resource consents ▪ establishing mine infrastructure on plant or machinery, including vehicles or vessels, production equipment or facilities, or storage facilities, and ▪ providing or contributing to the cost of providing utility services to the operations in the permit area. “Mining development expenditure” does not include the cost of land, operational expenditure (being expenditure incurred in the day-today operation of a mine after production has commenced that does not create, or contribute to the creation of, an asset with an expected life of more than one year), expenditure that falls into one of the other main categories, and residual expenditure. In addition, the term does not include any expenditure incurred on property after commercial production has begun that has an estimated useful life independent of the mine. This is intended to capture ongoing expenditure of the mining operations, including plant and machinery purchased after commercial production has begun, that should be deducted according to the estimated useful life of that asset. Spreading rules for mining development expenditure There are two spreading methods contained within the rules for mining development expenditure. In both cases a deduction for the expenditure is denied until the mineral miner starts to use the permit area to derive income. The expenditure is then spread either on the basis of units of production or over the assumed life of the mine.  Units of production basis To apply the units of production basis (sometimes known as the “reserve depletion” basis), the mineral miner must either use IFRS rules to prepare their financial statements, or keep appropriate records that are sufficient to enable the Commissioner to verify the calculations used. A mineral miner that satisfies this requirement can then choose whether to spread the expenditure on the basis of units of production or over the assumed life of the mine. Miners who do not satisfy the requirement, or who choose not to allocate expenditure under the units of production method, must adopt the assumed life of the mine method. If a miner elects to use the unit of production method, they may make an election in their return of income for the income year that is the first year in which the miner’s commercial production of a listed industrial mineral starts. Any such election is irrevocable. If the miner elects to spread on the basis of units of production, the deduction for the expenditure incurred and allocated to an income year is calculated using the following formula in s EJ 20E(3): (reserve expenditure − previous expenditure) × reserve depletion for the year ÷ proven and probable reserves In the formula: reserve expenditure is the total mining development expenditure (including clawed back exploration expenditure) for the permit area for the income year and earlier income years to which the section applies previous expenditure is the total expenditure for the permit area that has been allocated to an earlier income year to which the section applies reserve depletion for the year is the amount of a listed industrial mineral produced from the permit area for the income year, and proven and probable reserves is the amount of the proven ore reserves and probable ore reserves of the listed industrial  mineral for the permit area as set out in the reserve statement for the area, provided the reserve statement is prepared in accordance with a classification code recognised for the purposes of estimating reserves and resources under the Crown Minerals (Minerals other than Petroleum) Regulations 2007. The amounts of the reserve depletion for the year and the proven and probable reserves must be expressed in an appropriate unit of measure as set out in the mineral miner’s reserve statement and must be the same measure used in the formula for the items defined above. Example 1: Miner A is in year three of commercial production of a permit area and its total development expenditure to date has been $50m. In the previous two years, Miner A has deducted $10m under the reserve depletion method. The latest reserve statement estimates that 1,000 proven and probable units of the mineral remain in the permit area. In year three, Miner A produces 250 units. Using the formula, Miner A will be allowed a deduction in year three of: ($50m − $10m) × 250/1000 = $40 × 0.25 = $10m Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 4, May 2014 at 36.  Assumed life of the mine If the expenditure is to be spread over the assumed life of the mine, the following formula applies: rate × value In the formula: value is the adjusted tax value or the diminished value of the expenditure, as appropriate. rate, to determine the relevant “rate”, the calculation in s EJ 20D must be undertaken and the “rate” will then be the rate set out in sch 12, column 2 (for the straight line rate) that is nearest to the  amount determined under that calculation. If the mineral miner chooses to use the diminishing value method, the “rate” will be the rate set out in sch 12, column 1 (for the diminishing value rate) that corresponds to the relevant straight line rate. The formula in s EJ 20D is: 100% ÷ assumed life In the formula: assumed life is a self-assessed determination of the life of the mine. For a mineral miner that uses an amortisation period for the mine for accounting purposes, the assumed life cannot be less than the accounting amortisation period. If a mineral miner is not required to use an amortisation period for their accounts, they must estimate the reasonable period they expect the permit area to accommodate commercial production. The assumed life cannot be more than 25 years from the later of the date commercial production begins in the permit area and the date on which the expenditure is incurred. A miner must reassess the assumed life of a mine at the end of each year and the figure arrived at will apply in the formula for the next income year. This is because, as a mine develops, it may be that an additional mineral deposit is discovered, which increases the assumed life, or that some factor results in the assumed life reducing. The spreading period starts from the later of: ▪ the first day of the income year in which the mineral miner’s commercial production of a mineral from the permit area starts, or ▪ the first day of the income year in which the expenditure is incurred, and ends on the last day of the income year in which the expiry of the assumed life of the mine.  Example 2: Miner B is in year one of commercial production and has incurred $50,000 in development expenditure on the permit area. Miner B is not required to use an amortisation period for its accounts. Using the information at its disposal, Miner B considers that it will be commercially producing minerals from the site for three years. Miner B wants to use a straight-line depreciation method. Using the formula: 100% ÷ assumed life Miner B must calculate the depreciation rate in sch 12 using the rate closest to 33.33%. The closest rate in the schedule is 30%. Using the formula in s EJ 20B: rate × value Miner B’s deduction in year one is: 30% × $50,000 = $15,000. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 4, May 2014 at 36.  A mineral miner may choose to allocate expenditure under either of these methods in relation to a mine, rather than in relation to a mining permit area, but only if the mineral miner uses IFRS rules to prepare their financial statements and the allocation is permitted for the purposes of their statements. Law: IT07 ss DU 6, DU 7, DU 8, DU 11, EJ 20B, EJ 20C, EJ 20D, EJ 20E, sch 12  ¶28-085 Mining rehabilitation expenditure Mining rehabilitation expenditure is deductible in the income year in which the amount is incurred. As the payment of mining rehabilitation expenditure may occur after the conclusion of a miner’s income earning activity, the rules allow for the generation of a tax credit. This is discussed below. “Mining rehabilitation expenditure” means expenditure incurred directly in relation to the rehabilitation of the permit area land carried out as a result of: ▪ the miner’s permit requirements  ▪ the requirements of an access arrangement issued under the Crown Minerals Act 1991 or regulations made under that Act ▪ an obligation of the miner under the Resource Management Act 1991 or regulations made under that Act ▪ a concession under the Conservation Act 1987 ▪ an authority under the Historic Places Act 1993, and includes amounts paid to restore, or towards restoring, the area of the operations either during or after those operations have ceased. Once again, it excludes the cost of the land itself, any expenditure that falls within one of the other categories, and residual expenditure. Law: IT07 ss DU 2, DU 12  ¶28-090 Land of a mineral miner Consideration derived from the disposal of land is treated as income of a mineral miner where the land is, or forms or is intended to form part of, a mining permit area or land adjacent to it: see ¶28-060. A mineral miner is allowed a deduction for land or interests in land acquired. However, no deduction is available for expenditure on land that does not constitute a mining permit area or land adjacent to it, or does not form, or is not intended to form, part of a mining permit area or land adjacent to it. A deduction is also denied if the expenditure is mining prospecting expenditure. In addition, any expenditure for which the miner has a deduction before disposing of the land or interest in land is also excluded. The deduction is allowed in the income year the miner disposes of the land or interest in land. This means that the timing of this deduction will match any income derived under the rules, and so a net income amount or deduction will be available in that year, depending on whether the land is sold for a profit or loss.  The disposal of land may be the final act of a miner’s operations, so it could occur in a period when no income-earning activity takes place. As for mining rehabilitation expenditure, any loss attributable to land sales may be eligible for a tax credit under the rules in s LU 1, discussed in ¶28-105. Law: IT07 ss DU 3  ¶28-095 Deductions for mineral mining assets Expenditure on the acquisition of a mineral mining asset is either immediately deductible or spread under one of the two available methods, depending on the timing of its acquisition. If the asset is acquired before the date a mining permit for the permit area to which the asset relates is obtained, then the expenditure is immediately deductible. Once a mining permit has been obtained, expenditure incurred on acquiring a mineral mining asset is treated as mining development expenditure and is therefore spread. Expenditure for these purposes does not include the actual application costs for a mining right or permit. The purchaser of a mineral mining asset is eligible for a deduction for that expenditure (either immediately or over time) and the person disposing of that asset will treat the consideration received as income (as discussed above). However, if a person, instead of acquiring the mineral mining asset outright, agrees to incur farm-in expenditure, the rules clarify that this expenditure is to be treated as if it were the applicable class of mining expenditure. If, for example, the expenditure was classified as development expenditure, the farm-in party would be allowed a deduction for that amount under one of the spreading methods. As the existing rights holder is not getting any money from the farm-out arrangement, the expenditure of the farm-in party is excluded income to the farm-out party. Law: IT07 ss DU 4, DU 5  ¶28-100 Other types of expenditure of a mineral miner  Other types of expenditure not covered by the rules are covered by the appropriate general rules set out in the Act. This includes the application of the capital/revenue distinction in determining whether expenditure is immediately deductible, deductible over time or not deductible.  ¶28-105 Tax credits for mineral miners Subpart LU allows mineral miners a refundable credit in circumstances when the miner has a net mining tax loss for a mining permit area for the income year that is greater than the net income of the miner for the income year from all other sources (the difference being the excess amount). To calculate this, the miner’s net mining loss is treated as if their only income were income derived from the mining permit area and the miner’s net income from other sources is treated as if there were no income from the mining permit area. The value of this credit is limited to the total income tax liability attributable to the relevant permit area. For a mineral miner to obtain a tax credit, the miner must also have either: ▪ incurred an amount of mining rehabilitation expenditure ▪ disposed of land for a loss, or ▪ incurred mining development expenditure in relation to a mining permit area for which the mining permit has been relinquished, revoked or surrendered or has expired and the miner has no existing privilege for the permit area. The amount of the tax credit is calculated using the following formula: expenditure or loss × tax rate The “expenditure or loss” is the excess amount referred to above to the extent to which it consists of the amounts listed above. The total amount of the credit will be limited to the lesser of:  ▪ the result of the formula, and ▪ the income tax paid by the miner on net income derived for all earlier tax years to the extent to which it relates to the permit area, calculated on a year-by-year basis and aggregated. Special rules apply to clarify the amount of the tax credit in cases where the credit is available to non-companies, that is trustees and individuals. The rules also clarify that any loss giving rise to a credit does not form part of a tax loss component or net mining loss of the miner. This is to prevent a miner from claiming a credit and also using the same loss to offset any future income. The credit generated is refundable. Law: IT07 s LU 1  ¶28-110 Anti-avoidance rules for mineral miners The anti-avoidance rules in s GB 20 that apply to petroleum miners have been extended so that they also apply to mineral miners. The section now applies when an arrangement includes the disposal of a mineral mining asset, the incurring of one or more of the classes of mineral mining expenditure, or a farm-out arrangement, and the arrangement has a purpose or effect of tax avoidance. In those circumstances, the Commissioner may adjust the taxable income of any person affected by the arrangement so as to counteract any tax advantage obtained by the person. Several types of arrangements involving the disposal of a mining asset, the incurring of mining expenditure or the entering into a farmout arrangement are specifically included within the section as arrangements having the effect of tax avoidance. Law: IT07 s GB 20  ¶28-117 Consolidation regime and mining companies  A mineral miner that is a company may form a consolidated group only with other companies that are mineral miners. See also ¶20-010 for a discussion of consolidation. Law: IT07 s FM 31(2)(b)  ¶28-118 Tax losses For discussion on the rules for carrying forward tax losses by a company that is a mineral miner, see ¶18-045. Law: IT07 s IA 7(7), (8), subpart IS  PETROLEUM MINING ¶28-120 Petroleum mining — background The current tax regime for petroleum mining was enacted in 1990 to replace earlier provisions based on the Petroleum Act 1937. That Act was replaced by the Crown Minerals Act 1991 which, among other things, provided for farm-out agreements and the issuing of exploration and development permits rather than licences as under the old Act. While this revised regime was stated to apply from 1 October 1991, it has generally applied to petroleum mining expenditure incurred and farm-out agreements entered into on and after 16 December 1991. Law: IT07 subparts CT, DT  ¶28-125 Overview of current regime for petroleum mining The principal effects of the current petroleum mining provisions are as follows: ▪ Ring-fencing of certain expenditure — expenditure incurred on petroleum mining operations undertaken through a branch in  another country cannot be deducted from income earned in New Zealand: see s DT 1A. ▪ Petroleum exploration expenditure may be deducted in the year it is incurred: see s DT 1(1). ▪ The deduction for petroleum development expenditure is spread over seven income years: see s EJ 12. This is the default allocation rule and amortises expenditure under the straight-line method. ▪ Offshore petroleum development expenditure deductions begin in the year the expenditure is incurred: see s EJ 12(2). ▪ Alternatively, the reserve depletion method may be employed. This provision allows development costs to be amortised in a manner that better reflects the allocation of development costs over the life of the field. Election to utilise this method must be made by election in the first year of commercial production. See s EJ 12B. ▪ Where a petroleum miner permanently ceases petroleum mining operations, stops drilling because a well is dry or a well stops producing petroleum in commercial quantities, the balance of the deductions for petroleum development expenditure not yet spread is deductible in the year the operations cease, the well is dry or it stops producing commercial quantities. See ss EJ 13, EJ 13B and EJ 13C. ▪ The income of a petroleum miner includes any consideration received from the disposal of: □ a petroleum mining asset (ie a petroleum permit or a permitspecific asset), or □ exploratory material (ie anything acquired as a result of exploratory well expenditure or prospecting expenditure): see s CT 1.  ▪ The income of a petroleum miner includes any consideration received for damage to a permit-specific asset: see s CT 2. ▪ Decommissioning expenditure incurred is deductible in the income year(s) in which it is incurred: see s DT 16. ▪ The cost of repair of a damaged permit-specific asset is deductible in the income year the cost is incurred: see s DT 12. ▪ A person who acquires a petroleum mining asset is treated as having incurred certain kinds of petroleum-related expenditure according to the asset acquired, as follows: □ petroleum exploration expenditure includes consideration paid for the purchase of an existing privilege, a prospecting permit for petroleum or an exploration permit for petroleum □ petroleum exploration expenditure includes consideration paid to acquire exploratory material, and □ petroleum development expenditure includes consideration paid to acquire a petroleum mining asset (excluding an existing privilege, a prospecting permit for petroleum and an exploration permit for petroleum). In each case, the expenditure in question is treated as having been incurred in the income year the petroleum mining asset is disposed of by the petroleum miner to the purchaser. ▪ A petroleum miner is eligible for a refundable credit for the following amounts: □ any decommissioning expenditure in the year it is incurred, and □ any development expenditure that has not been deducted at the time commercial production ceases.  The refundable credit is calculated by multiplying the qualifying expenditure by the petroleum miner’s current tax rate. The maximum refundable credit is limited to income tax paid by the petroleum miner, or a consolidated group it is a member of, in prior years. The exception to this is when a petroleum miner is decommissioning operations outside New Zealand, in which case the maximum refundable credit is limited to income tax paid on petroleum mining operations outside New Zealand. Any expenditure qualifying for a refundable credit will be added back as income if production restarts. See ss CT 5B, DT 7B, EJ 13, LA 6(1)(ib), LT 1 and LT 2. ▪ Farm-out arrangements are generally the transfer of licence or licence share in return for work or work expenditure undertaken by the farm-in party: see s YA 1. The expenditure incurred on the part of the farm-in party is excluded income of the farm-out party if that expenditure is specifically used for exploring or developing that particular permit: see s CX 43. (Farm-outs occur when a firm that has discovered hydrocarbons under a permit seeks to bring in a new investor to share the development cost and are the main method of spreading risk and injecting capital into petroleum exploration programmes.) ▪ The farm-in expenditure incurred by the farm-in party is treated as if it were petroleum development expenditure, exploratory well expenditure or prospecting expenditure, as applicable. The farm-in party is allowed a deduction for the farm-in expenditure incurred under the farm-out arrangement. See s DT 14. ▪ The consideration derived from the disposition of shares or trust interests in a controlled petroleum mining entity is excluded income and no deduction is allowed for the cost of shares or trust interests in a controlled petroleum mining entity. See ss CX 42 and DT 13. A controlled petroleum mining entity is defined to mean one of the following:  □ a controlled petroleum mining company, ie a company that is a petroleum miner where: — at least 90% of the shareholding is held by or for five or fewer persons, and — the market value of any petroleum permit, and any petroleum specific assets attributable to that permit, is at least 75% of the net assets of the company as shown in its audited financial statements or accounts prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting practice □ a controlled petroleum mining holding company, ie a company where: — at least 90% of the shareholding is held by five or fewer persons, and — at least 75% of the net assets of the company, as shown in its audited financial statements or accounts prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting practice, comprise the market value of shares in petroleum miners that are companies and petroleum mining holding companies and trust interests in petroleum mining trusts and petroleum mining holding trusts □ a controlled petroleum mining trust, ie a trust that is a petroleum miner where: — at least 90% in value of the trust is owned by five or fewer persons, and — the market value of a petroleum permit held by the trust, and any permit-specific assets attributable to that permit, is at least 75% of the net value of the assets of the trust as shown in the trust’s accounts prepared in  accordance with generally accepted accounting practice □ a controlled petroleum mining holding trust, ie a trust that is a petroleum miner where: — at least 90% in value of the trust is owned by five or fewer persons, and — at least 75% of the net assets of the trust as shown in the trust’s accounts, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting practice, comprise the market value of trust interests in petroleum mining trusts and petroleum mining holding trusts and shares in petroleum mining companies and shares in petroleum mining holding companies. For the above provisions, associated persons are treated as one person. In other words, there is aggregation of the shareholdings and trust interests of associated persons to determine whether shares or trust interests are held by five or fewer persons. Anti-avoidance provision The petroleum mining regime contains an anti-avoidance provision directed at arrangements — including the disposal of any petroleum mining asset, the incurring of exploration expenditure, or a farm-out arrangement — that have the effect or purpose of tax avoidance. The Commissioner may adjust the taxable income of any person affected by such an arrangement so as to counteract any tax advantage obtained by the person. See s GB 20. Determinations Section 91 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides that certain questions relating to petroleum mining activities carried on by a petroleum miner are to be determined by agreement between the petroleum miner or petroleum miners affected and the Commissioner. In the absence of agreement, the Commissioner  determines the question after consulting, if the Commissioner considers it necessary, organisations or persons with relevant expertise or information. The petroleum miner can contest the determination through the challenge procedures. Law: IT07 subparts CT, DT, LT, ss CX 42, CX 43, CZ 32, EJ 12, EJ 12B, EJ 13, EJ 13B, EJ 13C, GB 20, LA 6(1)(ib), YA 1; TAA s 91  ¶28-130 Prohibition against double-dipping of mining deductions If a person is entitled to a deduction under s DT 1 for petroleum exploration expenditure and has an arrangement under which: ▪ the person or an associated person may dispose of property under the arrangement (or a right given by the arrangement, or in meeting an obligation arising from a right given by the arrangement), and ▪ the property is not exploratory material, or a petroleum permit, or material or a permit that relates to petroleum mining operations undertaken outside New Zealand, the amount of the deduction may be subject to an adjustment under s DT 2 that effectively adjusts the deductible expenditure by the amount of consideration received for the property. The deduction allowed is nil or the amount given by the following formula (whichever is the greater): expenditure − (consideration − lesser amount) where: expenditure is the amount of the expenditure that would be deductible in the income year under s DT 1(1) consideration is the total consideration for the property that is derived before or during the income year, and  lesser amount is either the total amount of expenditure that would be deductible in earlier income years under s DT 1(1), or the amount of consideration as defined above (whichever is the lesser). Under s DT 2(3) if consideration for the property is derived in an income year, the person’s deductions in earlier income years for the expenditure referred to in s DT 2(1)(a) are adjusted so that the total of those deductions is nil or the amount given by the following formula (whichever is the greater): previous expenditure − consideration where: previous expenditure is the amount of expenditure that would be deductible in earlier income years under s DT 1(1), and consideration is the total consideration for the property that is derived before or during the income year. Example 1: A person incurs $50 expenditure in year 1 and derives $70 as consideration in year 2 for property disposed of under an arrangement. expenditure − (consideration − lesser amount) Year 1:  50 − (0 − 0) = 50  Year 2:  0 − (70 − 50) = −20  The deduction allowed in year 1 is $50. The deduction allowed in year 2 is nil. Because consideration is also derived in year 2, a further adjustment is required: expenditure − (consideration − lesser amount) Year 2:  50 − 70 = −20  In year 2, therefore, the $50 deduction in year 1 (the earlier income year) is reduced to nil.  Example 2: A person incurs $100 expenditure of which $50 is deductible in year 1 and $50 in year 2. In year 2, $70 is derived as consideration for the disposition of property. The  treatment of the $50 of expenditure deductible in year 1 is as follows: expenditure − (consideration − lesser amount) Year 1:  50 − ( 0 − 0 ) = 50  Year 2:  50 − (70 − 50) = 30  A further adjustment is required because consideration has been derived in year 2. previous expenditure − consideration Year 2:  50 − 70 = −20  The deduction for year 1 is reduced to nil. At the end of year 2 a $30 deduction is allowed. Examples from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 6, July 1999.  The four-year time bar (see ¶4-110) does not apply to the application of s DT 2, ie the Commissioner may amend a person’s assessment at any time to reflect the deductions allowed by s DT 2. Law: IT07 s DT 2  ¶28-135 Exploration and development activities by nonresident company There is an exemption for income derived by a non-resident company from exploration and development activities in an offshore permit area. The exemption applies to income of this type that is derived in the four-year period from 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2024. (Note that previous exemptions have applied since the beginning of the 2005–06 income year.) Exploration and development activities are the operation of a ship to provide seismic or electromagnetic survey readings or the drilling of an exploratory well or other well. These activities must be undertaken for the purposes of identifying and developing exploitable petroleum deposits or occurrences in an offshore permit area. Using a drilling rig of modular construction that is installed on an existing offshore platform is specifically excluded from being exploration and development activities. An exploratory well is a well in a permit area that is drilled for the purpose of locating petroleum, confirming the existence, non-  existence, quantity or composition of petroleum or ascertaining whether petroleum is recoverable in commercial quantities. A permit area is the area of land, and may include more than one area, covered by a petroleum permit or mining permit. An offshore permit area is an area of land in New Zealand that is on the seaward side of the mean high-water mark and is a permit area or part of a permit area. Law: IT07 ss CW 57  SAVINGS INVESTMENT, KIWISAVER AND SUPERANNUATION Portfolio Investment Entity (PIE) Regime ¶29-100 KiwiSaver  ¶29-200  Retirement Savings Schemes  ¶29-300  Superannuation Schemes  ¶29-400  PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT ENTITY (PIE) REGIME ¶29-100 Background to the PIE regime The portfolio investment entity (PIE) regime is a system for taxing collective investment entities that operate principally at the retail (or individual investor) level. A collective investment vehicle may attract funds for investment on a portfolio (passive) basis from both retail investors and wholesale investors. The PIE regime provides that the returns of retail investors are effectively subject to the imposition and payment of income tax in the hands of the PIE as a collective investment vehicle. This relieves the investor from the obligation to furnish a return of income reporting the investment income and making payment of the tax. Wholesale investors and certain other eligible investors in the PIE may be treated as “zero-rated” investors so as to be personally liable to report and pay tax on the investment income derived from the PIE. The PIE regime as an income tax collection mechanism substantially relies on the other tax regimes for the determination of what is  income for the PIE. For example, a PIE’s income from portfolio investment in foreign equities would be determined under the foreign investment fund rules (see ¶26-110). However, a specific but important exception to this reliance on other regimes is that gains from the disposal of the shares of a company resident in New Zealand or the shares of a company resident in Australia that are listed on the ASX are excluded income of a PIE. This is a deliberate feature of the PIE regime that recognises that these kinds of investment, if held directly by the investors in the PIE, would most likely be held on capital account. Effectively, gains from trading in both categories of shares are not assessable income for the PIE. The PIE regime can be regarded as one component of a package of measures designed to encourage retirement savings. The PIE regime shares the common commencement date of 1 October 2007 with the KiwiSaver regime established by the KiwiSaver Act 2006. Contributions by members of KiwiSaver schemes are invested by a KiwiSaver “provider” which, in turn, may have status as a PIE or, if not, may channel investment funds to a PIE. The PIE regime assists with the promotion of retirement savings by enabling the taxation of investment income on a non-distortionary basis or at a concessional rate. Taxation on a non-distortionary basis is achieved by the investment income of a lower marginal rate investor being taxed at the investor’s lower rate rather than a higher “corporate” rate that otherwise might be ascribed to a collective investment vehicle. Amendments made in 2011 extended the PIE regime to include optional rules for foreign investment PIEs, of which there are two kinds. The rules for zero-rate PIEs commenced on 29 August 2011, while for variable-rate PIEs the commencement date was 1 April 2012. Refer to ¶29-155. The legislative provisions for the PIE regime are predominantly found in subpart HM of the Income Tax Act 2007. Law: IT07 ss CX 55, HM 1, HM 6  ¶29-105 Types of PIE A portfolio investment entity (PIE) may be one of five different kinds of PIE. The kinds of PIEs are: ▪ a multi-rate PIE — an unlisted entity that calculates and pays tax on the basis of the portfolio investor rate notified by its investors and that may maintain more than one portfolio investor class ▪ a listed PIE — a company listed on a recognised exchange in New Zealand that has only one portfolio investor class and that is subject to the company rate of income tax ▪ a benefit fund PIE — a registered superannuation scheme operating on the principle of unallocated funding that does not attribute income to investors ▪ a life fund PIE — a discrete investment fund maintained by a life insurer with investment returns directly linked to benefits payable under life insurance policies associated with the fund ▪ a foreign investment PIE — either a foreign investment zero-rate PIE or a foreign investment variable-rate PIE. An entity that is choosing to become a PIE must satisfy further eligibility criteria concerning investors, types of investment and income, depending on the type of PIE it is. Law: IT07 ss HM 2, YA 1  ¶29-110 Entity requirements for becoming a PIE To become a portfolio investment entity (PIE) an entity must meet the eligibility requirements, choose to become a PIE and notify the Commissioner by lodging the appropriate election. The requirements specified in s HM 7 state that a PIE must: ▪ meet the detailed entry requirements as applicable:  □ the PIE must be resident in New Zealand (s HM 8) □ the PIE must be a collective investment vehicle (s HM 9) □ the entity, with the exception of a life fund PIE, must not carry on a business of life insurance (s HM 10) □ investors in the assets of the PIE, other than a life fund PIE, must have rights to all of the income from those assets and not just certain classes of income, other than category B income (ie no streaming of income classes to different investors) (s HM 17) □ a company not listed on a recognised exchange in New Zealand may choose to become a listed PIE if it meets the specified criteria (s HM 18) □ the PIE must not have ceased to have PIE status within the previous five years (s HM 20) ▪ be one of the types of PIE listed in s HM 2(2): □ a multi-rate PIE (the most common type) □ a listed PIE □ a benefit fund PIE □ a life fund PIE, or □ a foreign investment PIE ▪ choose to become a PIE (s HM 71) or a foreign investment PIE (s HM 71B) ▪ maintain the requirements of the rules in ss HM 8–HM 20, as applicable, (which include requirements as to investment types, income sources, maximum shareholdings, minimum numbers of investors, and maximum investor interests), and  ▪ not lose PIE status under the exit rules in ss HM 24–HM 30. Law: IT07 ss HM 2–HM 30, HM 71, HM 72, HM 75, YA 1  ¶29-111 Election to become a PIE An entity choosing to become a portfolio investment entity (PIE) or a foreign investment PIE must notify the Commissioner in the prescribed electronic format. An election takes effect on the latest of the following dates: ▪ the date the entity is formed ▪ the date set out in the notice ▪ 30 days before the Commissioner receives the notice. An entity’s election to become a PIE will not take effect if within 12 months it cancels the election or breaches any one of the eligibility criteria. Where an entity with a non-standard balance date chooses to become a PIE it will have a transitional income year. The transitional income year will commence on the date the election to become a PIE takes effect and will end on the following 31 March. Notional disposal and reacquisition Upon electing to enter the regime, a notional disposal and reacquisition of certain Australasian shares held by the entity occurs. Those shares are deemed to be disposed of and reacquired at market value. Unrealised gains on revenue account will be taxed and any resulting tax liability (free of penalties and interest) can be spread over three years, see s HM 73(3). Losses can be carried forward and either attributed to investors or, in some cases, carried forward to future income years. A similar deemed disposal and reacquisition occurs when a PIE leaves the regime. See s HM 75. Law: IT07 ss HM 71, HM 72, HM 73, HM 74, HM 75; TAA s 31B  ¶29-112 Ceasing to be a PIE Portfolio investment entity (PIE) status will be lost if the entity fails to comply with certain eligibility requirements. Some eligibility requirements permit temporary breaches, in limited circumstances, before PIE status will be revoked. An entity will also lose PIE status if it chooses to cancel PIE status. Immediate loss of PIE status An entity will lose PIE status immediately if it: ▪ changes its New Zealand residency status ▪ changes the nature of its entity to one that is not eligible for PIE status (see s HM 9) ▪ changes the rights of investors to all income from the assets (see s HM 17) ▪ starts to carry on the business of life insurance and it is not a life fund PIE ▪ fails to meet the investor interest adjustment requirements in s HM 48 and it is a multi-rate PIE ▪ fails to fully impute where imputation credits are available for distribution and it is a listed PIE, other than a life fund PIE ▪ with effect from 18 March 2019, is a listed PIE that does not make an election to cancel its PIE status and ceases to be listed by a recognised exchange ▪ with effect from 18 March 2019, is a listed PIE that makes an election to cancel its PIE status and the two-year period (or such longer period as granted by the Commissioner) since its delisting from a recognised exchange expires, or ▪ with effect from 18 March 2019, is a listed PIE, when the entity is not listed by a recognised exchange, the number of  shareholders in the entity is less than 100. Loss of PIE when entity no longer meets investment or investor requirements A different approach is adopted for the failure to meet the remainder of the eligibility requirements. This is for the eligibility requirements that comprise: ▪ the investment type requirement (s HM 11) ▪ the income source requirement (s HM 12) ▪ the maximum shareholding investment requirement (s HM 13) ▪ the minimum number of investors requirement (tested per investor class) (s HM 14), and ▪ the maximum investor interest requirement (tested per investor class) (s HM 15). An entity will lose its PIE status if, on the last day of a quarter (the first quarter), one of these requirements is no longer met and the failure to meet that requirement is significant and within the control of the entity. Loss of status begins on the first day of the following quarter (the second quarter). Where a breach is “not significant” and/or “not within the control of the entity”, a temporary breach of those requirements is permitted provided that the breach is corrected by the last day of the second quarter. In effect the entity could have up to six months to remedy the breach depending upon when the breach first occurred. If the temporary breach is not remedied by the last day of the second quarter, the entity loses PIE status immediately following the end of that quarter. Commencement or winding up Temporary breaches of the five listed requirements are also further accommodated on the commencement and winding-up of a PIE.  Measuring the temporary breaches does not need to be undertaken in respect of a first quarter that: ▪ starts within six months and one day of the date on which the entity becomes a PIE, or the investor class is formed, or ▪ ends within three months before an announcement by the entity to its investors that it, or the relevant investor class, is winding up within 12 months of the announcement. Potentially, this gives an entity a maximum period of 12 months before failure to meet one or more of these requirements will trigger cancellation of PIE status. Fund managers should ensure that their operating documents, eg trust deeds, provide them with the necessary powers to control and adjust for all factors to ensure ongoing compliance with the eligibility criteria. Voluntary cessation A PIE, including a foreign investment PIE, can also choose to cancel PIE status by providing the Commissioner notice in accordance with s 31B of the Tax Administration Act 1994. An election to cease being a PIE is effective from the later of: ▪ the date on which the entity became a PIE ▪ the date nominated in the notice ▪ the date of receipt of the notice by the Commissioner. Section 31B states that notice must be in the prescribed electronic form. Section 31B also states that notice must be provided within one month of the cancellation of PIE status. This is confusing as it is difficult to imagine how notice can be given within one month of cancellation of PIE status, when the notice is given to request cancellation. Law: IT07 ss HM 24–HM 29, HM 72, HM 75  ¶29-113 Foreign PIE equivalent A foreign PIE equivalent is, broadly, a non-resident entity that would be eligible to be a PIE if it were resident in New Zealand. Foreign PIE equivalents are able to hold 100% of a New Zealand resident PIE, and vice versa. See s HM 3. The definition of a foreign equivalent PIE was amended to include an Australian managed investment trust (MIT) provided that the MIT is not a tax resident in New Zealand. Several exceptions to the investment and investor requirements apply for foreign PIE equivalents. See s HM 23. A foreign PIE equivalent loses that status immediately if it becomes resident in New Zealand and, alternatively, may lose that status if it fails to meet any of the other eligibility requirements to be a foreign PIE equivalent at the end of two consecutive quarters, with such loss taking place from the first day of the next (being the third) quarter. Law: IT07 ss HM 3, HM 23, HM 30  ¶29-115 Multi-rate PIEs A multi-rate PIE is a company, superannuation fund or a group investment fund that: ▪ meets the requirements of s HM 7 ▪ chooses to become a PIE ▪ has not chosen to cancel its PIE status, and ▪ is not a benefit fund PIE. A multi-rate PIE must generally have at least 90% (by value of its assets) of its investments in: ▪ land ▪ financial arrangements ▪ excepted financial arrangements  ▪ rights or options in any of the three categories above. The usual tax treatment of companies and trusts does not apply to multi-rate PIEs. In practice, multi-rate PIEs are the most common type of PIE. Taxation of investment income In very general terms, the investment income of a multi-rate PIE is notionally attributed to its respective investors on the basis of their investment in the multi-rate PIE. Income tax is paid by the multi-rate PIE on behalf of those investors based on their individual income attributions and at a tax rate notified to the PIE by each investor (the notified investor rate). This resembles the liability that would arise if the investors had made the investments separately. A multi-rate PIE may have more than one investor class if investors in the entity are organised into classes on the basis of like investments. Attribution to investors A multi-rate PIE must distribute income to investors after deducting the appropriate tax liability. A multi-rate PIE can choose how frequently it attributes PIE income, expenses, losses and credits to its investors. Attributions are made for an investor as a member of an investor class. The attribution period selected by a multi-rate PIE determines the period and frequency at which attributed PIE income and losses are attributed to investors. The attribution period can be daily, monthly, quarterly or annually, and on investor exit. A multi-rate PIE cannot elect an attribution period that is longer than its calculation period (see below). If a multi-rate PIE makes no election, its attribution period is daily. Calculation of investors’ tax liability A multi-rate PIE can also choose how often it calculates its investors’ income tax liability during an income year. A calculation period may cover a number of attribution periods. A multi-rate PIE can elect to calculate its investors’ income tax liability quarterly, as a provisional taxpayer, or annually and on investor exit. In the latter case, the entity either pays tax when the investors exit the entity, under s HM 42, or, for investors who remain in the entity, within one month of the  end of the tax year. The tax liability would be the PIE tax liability for all calculation periods of the tax year. If no election is made, a multirate PIE is required to calculate its investors’ income tax liability quarterly. Provisional tax A multi-rate PIE with a calculation period of a year may elect to pay tax under the provisional tax regime (see s HM 44). Provisional tax payments are a credit against the tax liability of the multi-rate PIE. The use of money interest rules may apply for provisional tax underpaid or overpaid. Quarterly basis Multi-rate PIEs that calculate tax quarterly do not pay provisional tax. When a multi-rate PIE calculates its tax liability on a quarterly basis, it is required to pay tax (less any optional tax payments made by the multi-rate PIE under s HM 45 for investors switching investor classes or reducing their investment) within one month following the end of the quarter. Voluntary payments A multi-rate PIE which pays tax quarterly or annually may elect to make a voluntary payment of tax when an investor reduces his or her investor interest. This may ensure that the relevant investor attributed PIE income is excluded income that the investor does not need to include in a tax return. Credits The multi-rate PIE may receive a tax credit for an investor’s attributed PIE loss (see ¶29-135). This is provided the investor is not a zero-rated investor (or an exiting investor who is treated as a zerorated investor under s HM 61). Specific rules apply to the attribution of imputation credits and credits for tax deducted or foreign tax paid. The credits may be attributed among investors or be a tax credit for the multi-rate PIE, depending upon the circumstances. An investor who has a notified investor rate equal to their prescribed investor rate and greater than zero, has no tax liability on the income  attributed to them by the multi-rate PIE. Tax rate The tax rate to be applied by a multi-rate PIE varies from investor to investor. The rate is referred to as the “portfolio investor rate” and is capped at 28% or, if the investor advises the multi-rate PIE within the required time period and provides their tax file number, is the investor’s “prescribed investor rate”. Notification of tax file number With effect from 1 April 2018, an investor in a multi-rate PIE (other than a PIE listed on a recognised exchange in New Zealand) must notify the PIE of their tax file number within six weeks of becoming an investor in the PIE. If they do not do so, the multi-rate PIE fund is required to close the member’s account and pay them the balance of their investment. Non-resident investors who do not have a tax file number but provide their country’s equivalent are not subject to the six-week notice requirement. However, if the non-resident investor becomes resident, they must notify the PIE they have become resident immediately and the six-week period will begin to run from the date