 reflects the approach adopted in QB 15/04. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13  ¶7-117 Commencement of the undertaking or scheme The time of commencement is relevant in applying the 10-year rule under s CB 12. It is also relevant in relation to calculating any amount derived under s CB 13 because it is only the amount derived from the commencement of the scheme that is regarded as income. Section CB 12 applies if a scheme or undertaking began within 10 years of the acquisition of the land. All subsequent disposals are caught if the scheme or undertaking commenced within 10 years of the acquisition regardless of when the land is disposed of. The commencement date of a scheme or undertaking will depend on the specific facts. However, as a general rule, a scheme will commence when the first positive or overt act in implementing the scheme occurs. The High Court in Cross v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,054 held that a distinction can be made between actions preparatory to the commencement of an undertaking or scheme and the implementation of the scheme itself. The Court also noted that an undertaking or scheme commences with an overt act. However, in order for there to be an undertaking or scheme, not every detail of the scheme need be settled before commencement. Also, the completion of preparatory work does not automatically lead to the commencement of a scheme, since a taxpayer may legitimately defer the commencement of a scheme. The Court of Appeal held that the date of commencement was the date on which a contract for earthworks was let and work started. It did not commence when the original scheme plan was lodged with the relevant local authority. In general, a development need not consist solely of physical activity. The legal process of obtaining any necessary resource consents may, in many cases, be regarded as part of the undertaking or scheme. Similarly, the date on which a direction to proceed is given to persons  engaged to carry out the scheme, or the date of entering into some contract or arrangement may signal the commencement of an undertaking or scheme. Generally, a scheme will commence when the first positive or overt act for putting the scheme into effect occurs. The planning or formulation of a scheme is separate from the implementation of a scheme. The Commissioner considers that commencement is the first step of a reasonably definite nature in a continuing series of steps leading to the development or subdivision being undertaken. This could be the preparation of the initial plan if the succeeding steps involving development followed on immediately, as it would be for the act of demolition of an existing structure on the land in question. Where there is an appreciable delay, the preparation may not trigger the start date. Example: A taxpayer’s first step was an application for a specified departure to allow the subdivision of land. Without the application, the land would have retained its rural character. The specified departure hearing was held to be an integral part of the scheme of development and subdivision. The commencement of legal work may evidence the commencement of a scheme. See Smith v C of IR (No 2) (1989) 11 NZTC 6,018 (CA).  Implications of the Cross and Smith cases There are a number of points to be learnt from these cases: ▪ Where there is a scheme of subdivision planned to be carried into effect in a number of stages, there will only be one commencement date for the purposes of ss CB 12 and CB 13. ▪ The planning or formulation of a scheme is separate and distinct from the implementation of a scheme. It is the commencement of the implementation of the scheme that is important for the purposes of ss CB 12 and CB 13. ▪ When a scheme commences is a question of fact. However, as a general rule, a scheme will commence when the first positive or overt act in implementing the scheme occurs.  ▪ In practice, it is clearly preferable that, where land has been held for a period close to the 10-year mark, no feasibility activity occurs until the 10-year period has elapsed. More than one scheme Problems can occur when a taxpayer has commenced an undertaking or scheme within the 10-year period but: ▪ has not completed a single scheme, and has become involved in two or more schemes affecting the same land, or ▪ has abandoned the original scheme and commenced an alternative scheme. The problem in this scenario is determining whether the subsequent scheme is a modification of the original scheme or an entirely new one. In Church v C of IR (1992) 14 NZTC 9,196, one scheme commenced within the 10-year period, but it was abandoned. Another scheme commenced outside the 10-year period. The profits from the second scheme were not assessable. The sales were part of a new scheme commenced after the 10-year period had ended. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13  ¶7-118 Deductions for property introduced into a scheme or undertaking Where the sale proceeds of land are taxable income, the land is “revenue account property”. Section DB 23 provides that a person is allowed a deduction for expenditure incurred as the cost of revenue account property. If an undertaking or scheme falls within the provisions in s CB 12, a deduction is allowed for the actual expenditure incurred in acquiring the land. This means that any increase in the introduced land’s value between the date of acquisition and the date the scheme commenced is taxable. In comparison, s DB 27 provides that where a person derives income under s CB 13 the person will be allowed a deduction for the land equal  to its market value at the time of the commencement of the scheme or undertaking. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13, DA 1, DA 2(1), DB 23, DB 27, YA 1  ¶7-119 Meaning of development or division into lots A “division into lots” seems to cover any procedure where the land is divided into separately marketable lots, whatever form those lots may take, rather than being limited to subdivision into separate freehold titles. The division of land by unit plan or cross-lease has been held to be a division into lots. “Development” work is the preparation of land for its intended use, but does not include construction of buildings: Dobson v C of IR (1987) 9 NZTC 6,025. Example 1: In the case of a division of land by unit plan, the plan of units had to be deposited under the Land Transfer Act 1952, and it referred to clearly delineated and defined pieces of land. See Case E90 (1982) 5 NZTC 59,471.  Example 2: In the case of the cross-lease, a flats plan was completed and purchasers received a lease in perpetuity of one of seven flats, together with an undivided seventh share of the land. The cross-leases and undivided seventh shares achieved seven separate lots. See Woolston v C of IR (1987) 9 NZTC 6,010.  Example 3: Physical change of the land is not necessary, because division into lots is an alternative to development. See Costello v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,253 (CA).  Interpretation statement In August 2020, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 20/08, “Income tax – when is development or division work ‘minor’?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 9, October 2020 at 10). In  summary, the statement makes the following comments on “development or division into lots”: “6. The undertaking or scheme must involve the ‘development of the land’ or the ‘division of the land into lots’. • ‘Development of the land’ includes work done on or in relation to the land in preparation for its intended use. This might include fencing, demolishing buildings, clearing the site, earthmoving, installing power or water, creating a driveway or entranceway, legal work, zoning applications, the drawing of engineering plans and specifications, and entering into contracts for the physical work necessary for the development. It does not include the development of buildings. • ‘Division of the land into lots’ requires, at a minimum, a level of activity designed to facilitate the division of land. This could include planning and preparation of formal plans; survey work, obtaining resource and building consents, and legal work, including the deposit of subdivision plans and the issue of separate titles if required. 7. The development or division work must be carried on by the person (or another person for them) and that work must be on or relating to the land. Work performed by a local authority in fulfilment of its own statutory function is not work carried on by the person (or another person for them).” The Commissioner also considers that the “division of the land into lots” includes subdivisions, unit-titling and cross leasing. The amalgamation of two or more lots of land into one lot will not, on its own, constitute the division of the land into lots for the purposes of s CB 12(1). However, if the amalgamation of land forms part of a subdivision scheme, the cost of that amalgamation work will be included in the cost of the division work. Resource consent Note that, while the Commissioner considers resource consent application fees are not included when evaluating whether development or division work is minor (as it is work done in fulfilment of the local authority’s own statutory function), the Commissioner does consider  that “development or division work” includes any work involved in obtaining an environmental assessment as part of the process of applying for resource consent. This is because obtaining an environmental assessment is “development or division work carried on by the person (or another person for them) on or relating to the land”. Boundary adjustments With regard to boundary adjustments (relocation, rearrangement or realignment) the Commissioner’s view is that all boundary adjustments are the division of the land into lots. There are two reasons for this view. The first is that the boundary adjustment requires the existing boundaries to be erased and new boundaries to be created, even if there is no increase in the number of lots. The work is exactly the same type of work that is carried out in a subdivision where the number of lots is increased. The second reason is that s CB 23B provides that s CB 12 applies where the land disposed of is the whole or part of any land to which s CB 12 applies or the whole or part of any such land together with any other land. Therefore, if the boundaries between adjoining lots of land owned by the same person are altered, there is a division into lots of the land comprised of those adjoining lots. While the term “division of the land into lots” has a broad meaning and encompasses all types of boundary adjustments, the amount received from the sale of that adjusted land may not be taxable under s CB 12 if: ▪ the other conditions of s CB 12(1) are not satisfied (that is, the division work is minor) ▪ one of the exclusions to s CB 12 is satisfied, or ▪ it can be established that the undertaking or scheme involving the land was not carried on with a view to disposing of that land. See IS 20/08. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13  ¶7-120 Meaning of work of a minor nature  Section CB 12 only applies where an undertaking or scheme involves work that is more than minor in nature. It is a question of fact whether the work is of a minor nature. The courts have held that most subdivisional activities, including the associated legal and engineering work, are to be taken into account. The consequence is that this aspect of the development provisions generally will be satisfied. For example: Whether the work is of a minor nature must, it seems, depend on an overall assessment of such matters as the time, effort and expense involved, measured both in absolute terms and relative to the nature and value of the land on which the work is done. See Lowe v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,006 (CA). To take into account the entire range of activities suggests that little is required by way of activity to constitute a plan or programme of action that is a taxable undertaking or scheme. Example 1: Subdivisional work in relation to a block of land included: ▪ fencing, planting and other work directly related to land, and ▪ professional work on surveying, plan preparation and legal services. The development and division work comprised surveying and engineering works and legal matters and cost over $9,000. The land and buildings cost $12,000. The Court concluded that a scheme costing approximately 75% of the value of the projects could hardly be said to have been of a minor nature. See Wellington v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,101.  Example 2: The demolition of existing houses was seen as the most significant feature in concluding that there was work of more than a minor nature. The development work involved demolition, clearing of sites, surveys and cross-leases. The demolition altered the whole character of each property, allowing for its complete redevelopment, which would not have been possible otherwise. The totality of work carried out was work of more than a minor nature. See Dobson v C of IR, Dobson v C of IR (1987) 9 NZTC 6,025. See also Case T25 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,160 per Judge Barber at 8,177.  Example 3: The subdivision of a block of flats into nine unit titles was not work of a minor nature. The Court of Appeal found that although the surveyor’s fees were modest and the total professional charges were very small, relative to land values, it took the surveyor 36 hours to achieve the subdivision into nine lots. The unit title subdivision also involved associated legal work, including establishing a new corporate body for the property. See Costello v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,253.  Commissioner’s interpretation In August 2020, the Commissioner issued an interpretation statement, IS 20/08, “Income tax – when is development or division work ‘minor’?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 9, October 2020 at 10). The statement updated and replaced interpretation guideline IG0010, “Work of a minor nature”, issued in 2005. The main conclusions in IS 20/08 were unchanged from IG0010, but some parts were updated for clarity and to account for the change in the wording of the legislation from “development or division work, not being work of a minor nature” to “the development or division work is not minor”. The statement was also updated to reflect the conclusions reached in QB 15/02 and QB 15/04. Safe harbour figures for absolute cost and relative cost have also been identified to assist taxpayers with compliance. In the Commissioner’s view, there are four factors to take into account in addressing the question of whether development or division work is minor. These are summarised in the statement as follows (see [8]): “• The total cost of the work done, in both absolute and relative terms Whether development or division work is minor depends on an overall assessment of the work involved, including the cost, as measured both in absolute terms (total cost) and relative terms (relative to the value of the land that is subject to the undertaking or scheme at the start of the development or division work). The Commissioner accepts that amounts of $50,000 or below are low in absolute cost terms. Similarly, the Commissioner accepts that relative costs of less than 5% of the value of the land at the start of the development or division work are low in relative cost terms. These figures are ‘safe harbours’ and are intended to give taxpayers greater certainty  when making this cost assessment. Both measures of cost must be considered as it is possible for costs to be low in absolute terms but high in relative terms, and vice versa. The cost factor is weighed along with the other three factors discussed below. However, the Commissioner considers that there will be a point where the absolute value of the sum spent on the development or division work is so high that this factor alone will indicate that the work is more than minor. • The nature of the professional services used Development or division work typically requires the services of professionals such as a solicitor, a surveyor, an engineer and/or a valuer. The more time a professional spends on the development or division work, the more likely that the development or division work is not minor. In addition, the more complex and significant the work undertaken by the professional the more likely that the development or division work is not minor. • The extent of the physical work required The more physical work undertaken as part of the development or division work, the more likely it is that the work is not minor. However, a lack of physical work does not necessarily mean that the development or division work will be minor. • The significance of the changes to the physical nature and character of the land The more significant the changes to the physical nature and character of the land since the development or division work began, the less likely it is that the development or division work will be minor.” Note that when applying the absolute and relative cost safe harbours, the Commissioner will give limited weight to the cost factor when evaluating whether work is minor where the taxpayer has been able to  keep development or division work costs low because they have performed the work themselves. Deciding if work is of a minor nature requires an overall assessment of what was done in the particular circumstances, having regard to the time, effort and expense involved measured in both absolute and relative terms, rather than the ticking off of items on a checklist. The statement includes a number of examples explaining the application of s CB 12, as well as an appendix containing a summary of cases that have considered whether development or division work was minor. Some of the examples follow: Example 4: Straightforward subdivision of a farm Mohammed owns a 75-acre farm he purchased six years ago. In addition to the house he lives in, there is an old farmhouse situated at one end of the property. Mohammed decides to subdivide off the old farmhouse and 2 acres of surrounding land. He arranges for a valuer to value the 75-acre farm shortly before the subdivision begins. The valuer estimates the value of the farm to be $1,800,000. Mohammed spends $20,000 on professional services to create the subdivision. The survey work and legal work is straightforward as it is a simple division of one parcel of land into two. No physical work is required as existing fencing and hedges separate the old farmhouse and surrounding land from the rest of Mohammed’s property. No easements for access or services are required. Mohammed sells the farmhouse and the surrounding 2 acres for $795,000. Is the sale of the farmhouse and the 2 acres of surrounding land taxable under s CB 12? ▪ There was an undertaking or scheme to divide the land into lots. ▪ The cost was low in absolute terms ($20,000) and in relative terms (1% of the predivision value of the land, being $1,800,000). ▪ The nature of the professional services used was straightforward. ▪ No physical work was required. ▪ The character or nature of the land did not change. ▪ The undertaking or scheme was begun within 10 years of the date on which Mohammed acquired the land. On the facts, the division work was minor. Therefore, the sale of the farmhouse and the 2 acres of surrounding land is not taxable under s CB 12.  Example 5: Subdivision with use of professional services and additional physical work and with land value unknown Elisapeta purchased 10 acres of land seven years ago for $500,000. She began to build her dream home on the land, but building costs exceeded her expectations and she decided to subdivide the land to help finance the construction: one lot of 3 acres with her home on it and one lot of 7 acres to sell. Elisapeta used the professional services of a surveyor, a solicitor and a geotechnical engineer. She also organised a landscaper to fence between the two lots and had an earthworks company excavate a driveway to one of the lots. An arborist felled several trees and cleared the site, as this was necessary for the subdivision of the land. The total cost of the division work was $60,000. Elisapeta did not know how much the 10-acre block was worth before she started the development. However, a council rating valuation from the year before for the undivided land was $1,000,000. Elisapeta sold the 7-acre block of land for $700,000, which allowed her to complete construction of her home. Is the sale of the 7-acre block taxable under s CB 12? ▪ There was an undertaking or scheme to develop and/or divide the land into lots. ▪ The cost was high in absolute terms ($60,000). The cost was also high in relative terms, being 6% of the pre-division value of the land. ▪ The use of several different professional services was required. ▪ Physical work was required, including site clearance, excavation of a driveway and installation of fencing. ▪ The character and nature of the land has changed, with the site cleared and trees felled. ▪ The undertaking or scheme was begun within 10 years of the date on which Elisapeta acquired the land. On the facts, Elisapeta’s subdivision involved development or division work that was more than minor. Accordingly, s CB 12 applies, and the sale price of $700,000 is taxable.  The statement also discusses when a person carries on development or division work: see ¶7-119. Law: IT07 s CB 12  ¶7-125 Income from disposal of land — major development or division Section CB 13 will apply to amounts derived from the disposal of land if the amount is derived in the following circumstances:  ▪ an undertaking or scheme is carried on (not necessarily as a business) ▪ the undertaking or scheme involves the development of the land or division work ▪ the development or division work has been carried on by or on behalf of the taxpayer on or in relation to that land ▪ the development or division work involves significant expenditure on channelling, contouring, drainage, earthworks, kerbing, levelling, roading or any other amenity, service or work customarily undertaken in major projects involving the development of land for commercial, industrial or residential purposes ▪ any one of the other land disposal provisions do not apply, and ▪ none of the following exclusions apply: □ residential land: see ¶7-225 □ business premises: see ¶7-260 □ farmland: see ¶7-270, or □ investment land: see ¶7-290. Section CB 13 is really a “catch all” provision in that it catches any amount derived from major subdivision schemes and can apply where the land subdivision scheme is not taxable under any of ss CB 6A–CB 12 and CB 14. The exclusions for development or division work used in carrying on the taxpayer’s business, for the taxpayer’s residence or for the derivation of rental income from that land have application to transactions that involve sale of land on which major development or subdivision has occurred under s CB 12 or CB 13. The meanings of “undertaking or scheme”, “development or division into lots” and “significant expenditure” in relation to s CB 13 are analysed further at ¶7-115, ¶7-119 and ¶7-127.  Law: IT07 s CB 13  ¶7-127 What is significant expenditure? Whether expenditure will be regarded as “significant” is a question of fact and degree to be determined in light of all the circumstances. The amount of expenditure as a proportion to the total value may be a relevant factor. However, from case law it would seem that the threshold for “significant expenditure” is not high. Example 1: A subdivision involved the creation of 105 residential sections from 17 acres fronting an ocean beach. The work included grassing raw sand, installing storm water drainage, making roads and extending electricity services. The taxpayer contended that there had been no significant expenditure because $103 had been spent per section. The court held, however, that regard should also be had to the surveying and legal costs and should include the taxpayer’s time, use of farm machinery on the physical work of the subdivision, the value of the land that resulted from the expenditure and the circumstances of the subdivision. However, contributions to local body reserve funds were excluded. The profits were assessable income. See Aubrey v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,765.  Example 2: Amounts paid by a taxpayer to the council for road, water and sewerage were excluded by the court. However, survey and valuation fees, expenditure on pipes and gravel and the notional cost of the taxpayer’s time were to be taken into account. Since these items of expenditure totalled no more than 1.4% of the sale price of the subdivided section, the expenditure was not regarded as being significant. See Mee v C of IR (1988) 10 NZTC 5,073.  Some controversy may attach to the proposition that expenditure should include some sort of notional cost for the taxpayer’s own efforts in the course of the undertaking or scheme. The concept of an expenditure for the purposes of provisions like the general permission are normally regarded as requiring some outlay or disbursement of funds. See further at ¶10-021. QWBA on what is significant expenditure  In April 2015, Inland Revenue released a Question we’ve been asked (QWBA), QB 15/02, “Income tax — Major development or division — What is ‘significant expenditure’ for section CB 13 purposes?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 4, May 2015 at 20). The item deals with what expenditure is relevant for s CB 13 purposes and when such expenditure will be regarded as “significant”. The QWBA concludes that expenditure on developmental work is relevant for s CB 13 purposes, but expenditure on non-developmental work is not. The value of a person’s time, effort or use of their machinery is not relevant, and neither is expenditure not yet incurred on the undertaking or scheme. Whether expenditure is “significant” requires consideration of the absolute amount, the amount relative to the pre- and post-development value of the land, and the context of the project. The item also qualified the earlier item, IG0010, “Work of a minor nature”, since replaced by IS 20/08 (see ¶7-120), in one respect. IG0010 was regarded as incorrect to the extent that it suggested that only physical work could be “development” work. The QWBA concludes that other non-physical development work that is customarily found in major projects involving development of land for commercial, industrial or residential purposes (for example, preparation of zoning applications, the drawing of engineering plans and specifications, and the provision of estimates) is relevant for s CB 13 purposes. The conclusions in QB 15/02 are now reflected in IS 20/08, which replaced IG0010 in August 2020.  ¶7-129 Value of the land A significant feature of the application of the provisions dealing with a major development or subdivision is that the cost base comprises the market value of the land at the commencement of the scheme. Under s DB 27, a taxpayer subject to s CB 13 is treated as having acquired the land immediately after the start of the scheme at the market value of the land at that time. The taxpayer is allowed a deduction for that value of the land. The effect is that any inflationary gain accruing over the period from acquisition until committal to the undertaking or scheme is eliminated from assessable income. For this reason, it is important that taxpayers obtain a valuation of the land at the time of the commencement of the scheme even if they consider that the proceeds are not income.  Law: IT07 s DB 27  ¶7-135 Income from disposal of land — rezoning gains The disposal of land gives rise to income in the following circumstances: ▪ the amount is not income under ss CB 6–CB 12 ▪ the land was disposed of within 10 years of acquisition ▪ the total amount derived exceeds the cost of the land, and ▪ at least 20% of the gain on disposal arises from at least one of the following: □ the rules of an operative district plan under the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA) □ the likelihood of the imposition of such rules □ a change to the rules after acquisition □ the likelihood of a change to the rules □ the grant of a consent under the RMA after acquisition □ the likelihood of a consent being granted □ a decision of the Environment Court made under the RMA after acquisition □ the likelihood of such a decision being made □ the removal of a condition, covenant, designation, heritage order, obligation, prohibition, or restriction under the RMA □ the likelihood of the removal of a condition, covenant, designation, heritage order, obligation, prohibition or restriction  □ an occurrence of a similar nature to any of the occurrences described above, or □ the likelihood of an occurrence of a similar nature to any of the occurrences described above, and ▪ none of the following exclusions apply: □ residential land: see ¶7-235, or □ farmland: see ¶7-280. Essentially, if at least 20% of the excess derived (being excess of amount derived over cost) on disposal is attributable to any of the above factors, the whole amount is taxable. However, the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under s DB 28, that is, the taxable amount reduces by the greater of: ▪ $1,000, or ▪ 10% of the derived amount exceeding the cost of the land multiplied by the number of each complete continuous 12-month period of the taxpayer’s ownership of the land (not exceeding 10). Example: In October 2016, an individual sold a piece of land for $270,000. The land was purchased in June 2008 for $100,000 and at least $34,000 (20% of the $170,000 gain) is due to a change in zoning. No other land disposal provision, or exclusion, applies. Ownership of the land from June 2008 to October 2016 constitutes eight complete years of ownership. The amount required to be included as assessable income for the 2016–17 income year is: Assessable income: sale proceeds  $270,000  Less cost of land  $100,000  less 10% of the gain for each complete year of ownership, being: $170,000 × 10% × 8  $136,000  Taxable income is  $34,000  The rezoning provisions require that a rezoning event has occurred, or a likelihood that one will occur sufficiently soon, to create a 20% share of the excess, arising upon the sale of the land. In deciding whether there was any zoning potential at that time, it is legitimate to look at what happened after the sale, if that is logically relevant to the existence of a zoning potential at sale date. “Likelihood” In Swan v C of IR (1979) 4 NZTC 61,515 (SC) and Case V3 (2001) 20 NZTC 10,021 at 10,039 the phrase “likelihood” was held to refer to something more than a bare possibility and something that was less than probable could satisfy the test. In addition, the stipulated event does not have to be likely in the immediate future as it need only be close enough to enhance the excess derived on disposal of the land by at least 20%. The fact that there was a zoning potential in existence when the land was bought (as well as at the time when the land was subsequently sold) does not mean that the rezoning provisions do not apply. What is to be looked for in such a case is the increase in potential during the time that the person holds the land. If the increase is sufficient to create 20% of the excess upon sale, the gain realised comes within the rezoning provisions. In ascertaining the proportion of the excess caused by a zoning potential, the market value of the land without that potential at the time of sale should be compared with the market value of the land with that potential at the time of sale, rather than with the actual sale price. The increase in the potential over the period of the person’s ownership must be sufficient to say that 20% of the excess was caused by that increase in potential. This is because the actual sale price might be affected by factors peculiar to the purchaser, not related to the zoning potential. Section CB 14 will apply even if the taxpayer is unaware of any zoningtype changes or likely changes as set out in the provision. Intention or knowledge is not relevant for the purposes of s CB 14. Law: IT07 ss CB 14, DB 28  ¶7-165 Land used as a landfill  An owner of land that has previously been used as a landfill may elect that the land be held on revenue account property. Where the following conditions are satisfied the election will be valid: ▪ the person uses the land as a landfill before disposal ▪ at the time of disposal, the land is not being used as a landfill ▪ the purchaser is not an associated person ▪ the person has notified the Commissioner within 12 months of acquisition that the land will be subject to the landfill provisions, and ▪ all land used by the person or an associated person is subject to similar election notice requirements. The effect of a valid election is that the landfill property is held on revenue account. Therefore, any gain or loss on disposal will be income or a deductible loss. Section CB 8 is an exception to the rule that no deduction is allowed for a loss in value of land. It recognises that no amount of restoration expenditure by a landfill owner can prevent a loss in land value: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 7, September 2005 at 27. The prospect of being able to deduct a loss on disposal is likely to be influential in determining whether any election should be made. Law: IT07 s CB 8  EXCLUSIONS ¶7-201 Exclusions from the land disposal provisions The land disposal provisions are subject to various exclusions. The exclusions encompass land that has been used for residential, business, farming or investment purposes and an exclusion for certain council-controlled organisations, Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) and companies in the same wholly-owned group. If applicable, the  exclusion prevents the creation of assessable income under one of the land disposal provisions. The exclusions are summarised in the table that follows. Category of Income MTG Exclusion income Tax Act reference 2007  Income MTG Tax Act reference 2007  Disposal within five years  s CB 6A  ¶7-050  main home  s CB 16A  ¶7-215  Purpose or intention of sale  s CB 6  ¶7-045  own residence  s CB 16  ¶7-211  business premises  s CB 19  ¶7-250  Business relating to land  s CB 7  own residence  s CB 16  ¶7-211  business premises  s CB 19  ¶7-250  Dealer’s other land  s CB 9  councilcontrolled organisation  s CB 15C  ¶7-209  Kāinga Ora s CB – Homes 15D and Communities  ¶7-210  own residence  s CB 16  ¶7-211  business premises  s CB 19  ¶7-250  councilcontrolled organisation  s CB 15C  ¶7-209  Developer’s other land  s CB 10  ¶7-055  ¶7-065  ¶7-085  Category of Income MTG Exclusion income Tax Act reference 2007  Builder’s other land  s CB 11 ¶7-095  Development s CB within 10 12 years  ¶7-115  Income MTG Tax Act reference 2007  Kāinga Ora s CB – Homes 15D and Communities  ¶7-210  own residence  s CB 16  ¶7-211  business premises  s CB 19  ¶7-250  councilcontrolled organisation  s CB 15C  ¶7-209  Kāinga Ora s CB – Homes 15D and Communities  ¶7-210  own residence  s CB 16  ¶7-211  business premises  s CB 19  ¶7-250  residential s CB development 17(1)  ¶7-225  own residence  s CB 17(2)  ¶7-225  business premises  s CB 20  ¶7-260  farmland  s CB 21  ¶7-270  investment land  s CB 23  ¶7-290  Category of Income MTG Exclusion income Tax Act reference 2007 Major s CB development 13  ¶7-125  s DB 27  Rezoning gains  s CB 14  ¶7-135  s DB 28  Income MTG Tax Act reference 2007  residential s CB development 17(1)  ¶7-225  own residence  s CB 17(2)  ¶7-225  business premises  s CB 20  ¶7-260  farmland  s CB 21  ¶7-270  investment land  s CB 23  ¶7-290  residential s CB development 18  ¶7-235  farmland  ¶7-280  s CB 22  Law: IT07 ss CB 15C–CB 23  ¶7-209 Exclusion for bodies controlled by local authorities The land tainting rules in ss CB 9–CB 11 were introduced to prevent tax avoidance, but were overreaching in the context of council groups by taxing capital account land in situations when there was no tax avoidance concern. The rules were amended to exempt entities linked by ownership or control to local authorities. Section CB 15C applies retrospectively from 1 September 2015, the date on which Auckland Council established a land development entity. The section prevents land held by council-controlled organisations of Auckland Council from being tainted by the land development entity under s CB 9(2), CB 10(2) or CB 11(1)(b)(ii). The exemption does not apply to:  ▪ entities associated with a local authority under the tripartite relationship test in s YB 14, and ▪ entities associated to a property developer when that developer is outside the council group, unless that association occurs under s YB 14. Consequential amendments were also made to ss CV 2 and FM 9 to ensure that those provisions are overridden by s CB 15C, otherwise a land disposal that was exempt under s CB 15C could still be taxable to the group because of the development activities of another group member. This ensures that the consolidated group rules do not defeat the intent of the land tainting amendments. Law: IT07 ss CB 9(3), CB 10(3), CB 11(3), CB 15C  ¶7-210 Exclusion for Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) With effect from 1 July 2017, Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand Corporation) and companies in the same wholly-owned group of companies have been excluded from the land tainting rules in ss CB 9(2), CB 10(2) and CB 11(1)(b)(ii). In addition, the associated persons rule in s CB 15(1) does not apply (see ¶7-432). The exclusion was introduced to correct an incorrect policy result for the Housing New Zealand (HNZ) group by imposing tax on sales that were not a policy concern. For example, a sale of a property in HNZ’s rental portfolio may have become taxable under the land tainting rules because of the development or building activities of another group member, despite not being ordinarily taxable under the land sale rules and there being no concern that HNZ was trying to undermine the rules. Consequential amendments were also made to ss CV 1, CV 2 and FM 9 to ensure that those provisions are overridden by s CB 15D, otherwise a land disposal that was exempt under s CB 15D could still be taxable to the group because of the development activities of  another group member. This ensures that the wholly-owned and consolidated group rules do not defeat the intent of the land tainting amendments. Law: IT07 ss CB 9(3), CB 10(3), CB 11(3), CB 15(1B), CB 15D  ¶7-211 Residential exclusion from land disposal provisions There is an exclusion for the disposal of land with a dwellinghouse situated on it, where the disposal would otherwise give rise to assessable income under one of the following land disposal provisions: ▪ land acquired with the purpose or intention of sale: see ¶7-045 ▪ land acquired for a business relating to dealing, developing or erecting buildings: see ¶7-055–¶7-061 ▪ the other land of a dealer (see ¶7-065), developer (see ¶7-085) or a builder (see ¶7-095). For the exclusion to apply, the following requirements must be satisfied: ▪ the person acquired the land with a dwellinghouse on it, or ▪ acquired the land and erected a dwellinghouse on it, and ▪ the dwellinghouse was occupied mainly as a residence by: □ the person □ if members of the person’s family live with them, the person and any family members living with them, or □ if the person is a trustee, one or more beneficiaries of the trust. The exclusion applies to the land with the dwellinghouse on it if the total area of the related land is 4,500 square metres or less. However, if that size is exceeded, the larger area must have been required for the reasonable occupation and enjoyment of the dwellinghouse. The exclusion does not apply to a person who has engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing of, or erecting and disposing of,  dwellinghouses used mainly as the taxpayer’s residence. ▸ Note: On 16 September 2019, Inland Revenue released the tax policy consultation document, “Habitual buying and selling of land”, because of concerns that the current regular pattern restrictions are not working as intended. As currently drafted, taxpayers who habitually buy and sell land can structure around the regular pattern restrictions by using associated persons to carry out separate transactions, or by varying each transaction so that there is no “pattern”. Following consultation, proposed amendments to the regular pattern restrictions in the residential, main home (see ¶7-215) and business premises (see ¶7-250) exclusion provisions were included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020. The proposed amendments expand the regular pattern restriction to apply to a group of persons undertaking buying and selling activities together, rather than the activities of a single person. For the purposes of the residential and the main home exclusions, a group of persons means two or more people when they occupy, or have occupied, all of the properties together as their residence. It includes a trustee of a trust or another entity if at least one of the people who occupy all the properties has significant involvement in, or control of, the activities of the trust or other entity. Example  Mr and Mrs A occupy all of the properties together as their residence. As a trustee of Trust A, Mrs A has significant involvement in, or control of, Trust A. As a trustee of Trust B, Mr A has significant involvement in, or control of, Trust B. Because Mr and Mrs A occupy all of the properties and have significant involvement in, or control of, the trusts that own two of the properties, Mr and Mrs A, Trust A and Trust B will be treated as a group of persons who undertake buying and selling activities together. Because those buying and selling activities form a regular pattern (as the properties are bought and sold at regular intervals), they will be subject to the regular pattern restriction (assuming all the properties were acquired with an intention of resale (see below)). Example taken from the Commentary to the Bill  For the residential exclusion, the regular pattern restriction currently applies when a person has engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing of, or erecting and disposing of, dwellinghouses occupied mainly as a residence by the person. This has been interpreted very narrowly to apply only when there is a similarity or likeness between the transactions. In contrast, the regular pattern restriction for the main home exclusion applies when the person has engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing of residential land used as their main home, and this more general wording has not been interpreted as narrowly. Thus, the proposed amendments also expand the regular pattern restriction in the residential exclusion to align it with the main home exclusion. This will ensure it applies to any regular pattern of buying and selling land used as a residence, with a focus on the regularity of the transactions rather than on what is done on the land while it is held. Finally, the proposed amendments clarify that the regular pattern restriction in the residential exclusion applies only when the land was acquired with a purpose or intention of disposal. This ensures that the restriction is better targeted at people who regularly buy and sell land on a speculative basis. The proposed amendments are intended to apply to land acquired on or after the date of enactment of the Bill, although land acquired before that date will be able to be considered for the purposes of determining whether a group of persons have a regular pattern. Question We’ve Been Asked In August 2016, the Commissioner released a QWBA, QB 16/07, “Income Tax — Land sale rules — Main home and residential  exclusions — Regular pattern of acquiring and disposing, or building and disposing” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 9, October 2016 at 4). The item considers what constitutes a regular pattern for the purposes of the main home (s CB 16A) and residential (s CB 16) exclusions. Whether there is a “regular pattern” involving disposing of property will depend on the number of similar transactions and the intervals of time between them. It will be a matter of fact and degree whether there is a regular pattern of such transactions. There must be at least two similar transactions for there to be potentially a regular pattern. However, it is acknowledged that generally at least three prior transactions would be needed for there to be a regular pattern. The item states that for there to be a “pattern” there has to be a similarity or likeness between the transactions. The reason or purpose for each transaction is irrelevant; it is the similarity of the transactions that is important. For a pattern to be “regular”, the transactions must occur at sufficiently uniform or consistent intervals. For a “regular pattern” involving disposal of property, a taxpayer must have engaged in the regular pattern independently of and before the transaction in question. The transaction being considered as potentially subject to tax is not taken into account in deciding if there is a regular pattern of such transactions. Merely residing in the premises in question for a period will not be sufficient to satisfy the residence requirement of this exclusion. In Case G76 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,348 the Authority found that the taxpayer’s occupation of the house was incidental to the purpose of building and then disposing of the property at a profit. Occupation was necessary only to provide the money to complete the scheme. In addition, the Commissioner does not consider that the exclusion applies to accommodation used on a short-term or transient basis, such as hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar buildings. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 8, January 1995 at 9. The exclusion will also apply to residences where the owner of the land is a trust and some or all of the beneficiaries of the trust occupy the dwellinghouse as a residence. Law: IT07 s CB 16  ¶7-215 Main home exclusion from bright-line test for disposal within five years There is an exclusion under s CB 16A from the bright-line test for the disposal of residential land (see s CB 6A and ¶7-050) for the disposal of a person’s main home. The exclusion applies to disposals of residential land acquired on or after 1 October 2015. Before 23 March 2020, the land must have been used predominantly, for most of the time the person had owned the property, for a dwelling that was the main home of the person or a beneficiary of a trust that owned the property (subject to some limitations, discussed below). With effect from 23 March 2020, the provision was amended to align the period of ownership for the main home exclusion from the brightline test with the period in the bright-line test itself. Thus, rather than considering the use of the land during the period the person owned the property, the exclusion now considers the use of the land during the bright-line period, ie from acquisition date to bright-line date. Main home A main home of a person is the one dwelling that is mainly used as their residence (their home). Where a person has more than one home, their main home is the dwelling with which they have the greatest connection. Used predominantly as main home For the exclusion to apply, the land must have been used predominantly for a dwelling that was the main home. This means that most of the area of the land must have been actually used for the home. The test is based on a person’s actual use of the property and not the person’s intended use of the property. In some circumstances, a person will be required to determine the area of land used for their private residential purposes and the area of land used for other purposes. For example, when a single property has been used by the owner partly as a residential home and partly as a rental property, the relative areas will need to be determined. In many cases, a taxpayer will have determined the relative areas in working out the tax deductions (insurance and rates, for example) that can be claimed.  The determination of the areas includes any land used for the relevant purposes (for example, a backyard or garage for the home). The exclusion can only apply where the property is actually used as the main home. It can only apply in full or not at all; it does not apply on a proportionate basis. As a result, if a property is used less than 50% of the time as the main home of the person, the main home exclusion will not apply. Used for most of the bright-line period as main home The land must have been used for their main home for most of the bright-line period, ie from date of acquisition to the bright-line date. Inland Revenue has said this requires use for more than 50% of the period. The land does not have to have been used without interruption as the main home. For example, a main home can be rented out for short periods while the owner is on holiday or before settlement of the sale of the property, as long as the time is less than the private residential use. The owner must have resided in the property as their main home. The exclusion will not apply when only a family member and not the owner, has used the property as their main home. Multiple homes Where a person resides in multiple homes, only one of those properties can be their main home. Their main home would be determined according to which property the person has the greatest connection with. The factors that determine these connections would include: ▪ the time the person occupies the dwelling ▪ where their immediate family, if any, live ▪ where their social ties are strongest ▪ the person’s use of the dwelling ▪ the person’s employment, business interests and economic ties to the area where the dwelling is located, and ▪ whether the person’s personal property is in the dwelling.  The factors are similar to those used to determine if a person has a permanent place of abode under current case law. IR has stated that existing guidance on the “permanent place of abode” test should assist in determining which property the person has the greatest connection with. Example 1: Holiday home Lisa rents an apartment in Wellington, where she lives with her son. The apartment is close to her office from which she runs her consulting business full-time. She is a member of a local tramping club and is on the Board of Trustees of her son’s school in central Wellington. She owns a house on Lake Taupo with views over the lake. She does not let the Lake Taupo property out when she is not using it. She spends four weeks with her son in this property over Christmas and New Year, and also uses the property for about five weekends during the ski season. When Lisa sells the Lake Taupo property, she cannot use the main home exclusion because it is not the property with which she has the greatest connection. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 85.  Example 2: Country store and house Barbara buys a country store that has living quarters attached. She resides in the living quarters and runs a retail business from the front half of the property. She estimates that the retail business uses 45% of the property and claims expenses (insurance and rates) on that basis against the retail income. Barbara sells the property. Barbara is not able to use the business premises exception as the land is not used predominantly for her retail business (45%). However, Barbara can utilise the main home exclusion because she has used the property predominantly (55%) as her main home during the bright-line period. She uses her previous estimate for her expenses to prove her actual use of the property. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 86.  Using the exclusion for two properties Under limited circumstances, a person may use the main home exception for two properties sold at the same time. An example is when a person lives in a home for less than one year as their main home and moves into a new home while trying to sell the original home. The original home may satisfy the requirements to be the person’s main home for the period before moving into the main home. The new home  may also satisfy the requirements to be the person’s main home for the subsequent period. The ownership overlap of the properties will not mean the original home fails to satisfy the requirements to be a main home for the previous period. If the two properties were sold at the same time, the owner would be able to use the main home exception for both properties (if they both satisfied the requirements to be a main home for the different periods). Example 3: Main home exception for multiple properties  The main home exclusion is available for both properties. Property 1 was the main home for 9 out of the 11 months of the bright-line period. Property 2 was the main home for the entire bright-line period. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 84.  Habitual sellers A person will not be able to use the main home exclusion if they: ▪ already used it two or more times in the previous two years, or ▪ have engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing of residential land used predominantly for a dwelling as a main home. In August 2016, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/07, “Income Tax — Land sale rules — Main home and  residential exclusions — Regular pattern of acquiring and disposing, or building and disposing” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 9, October 2016 at 4). The QWBA considers what constitutes a regular pattern for the purposes of the main home (s CB 16A) and residential (s CB 16) exclusions. See the discussion of the QWBA in ¶7-211. (Note that although the bright-line period has been extended to five years for land acquired on or after 29 March 2018 (see ¶7-050), the application of the main home exclusion continues to consider how often the exclusion has been used in the previous two-year period.) ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes amendments to the regular pattern restrictions in the residential (see ¶7-211), main home and business premises (see ¶7-250) exclusion provisions. For the purposes of the main home exclusion, the proposed amendments expand the regular pattern restriction to apply to a group of persons undertaking buying and selling activities together, rather than the activities of a single person. A group of persons means two or more people when they occupy, or have occupied, the residential land together as their main home. It includes a trustee of a trust or another entity if at least one of the people who occupy all the properties has significant involvement in, or control of, the activities of the trust or other entity. See ¶7-211 for an example of a group of persons for these purposes. The amendments are intended to apply to land acquired on or after the date of enactment of the Bill, although land acquired before that date will be able to be considered for the purposes of determining whether a group of persons have a regular pattern. Main home exclusion and trusts If a property is owned by a trust, the main home exclusion will apply to the trustee when the dwelling is the main home of a beneficiary of the trust. The land must be used predominantly for a dwelling that is the beneficiary’s main home for most of the bright-line period. If a principal settlor of a trust has a main home that is not the one being disposed of by the trust, the main home exclusion cannot apply to any property owned by the trust.  A principal settlor of a trust is the person whose settlements for the trust are the greatest or greatest equal, by market value. For these purposes, a person’s settlements do not include the provision of services at below market value. In addition, a person is not a principal settlor if they have provided a “no strings attached” gift to the trust. A transfer of value will also be disregarded unless that transfer is by: ▪ a beneficiary ▪ a trustee ▪ a person with power of appointment or removal of trustees ▪ a person with a contingent interest in the trust property, in the case that the trust fails, or ▪ a decision-maker under the trust. There is no guidance as to who “a decision-maker under the trust” might be. It is presumed that this will include protectors, advisory trustees and any other person in a role that gives the person any power over the trustees or the ability to exercise what would otherwise be trustee powers. A person with the ability to determine a trustee dispute or disagreement might also be a decision-maker under a trust. Accordingly, care should be taking when drafting deeds of trust to avoid inadvertently providing that a person is or could be a principal settlor of a trust. To be able to determine who the principal settlor is, trustees will need to ensure adequate records of gifting and settlements onto the trust by all settlors (as defined for tax purposes), not just the settlors named in the deed of trust. The definition of “settlement” is modified for the purposes of s CB 16A(3) by the definition of “settlement” in s YA 1. Example 4: Trusts — student flat Dave has two properties, a family home that he lives in, and a student flat that his son lives in while studying. Dave settles the student flat on a trust and makes his son a discretionary beneficiary of the trust. The trust cannot use the main home exclusion because the principal settlor of the trust (Dave) has another main home.  Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 86.  QWBAs In December 2018, Inland Revenue released two Questions We’ve Been Asked — QB 18/16, “Income tax — bright-line test — main home exclusion — sale of subdivided section” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 1, February 2019 at 43) and QB 18/17, “Income tax — brightline test — farmland and main home exclusions — sale of lifestyle blocks” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 1, February 2019 at 48). Note that the QWBAs were released before 23 March 2020, when the main home exclusion was amended to refer to the bright-line period, rather than the time the land was owned (as discussed above). However, the general principles discussed in the QWBAs remain applicable. In QB 18/16, the item considers whether the main home exclusion to the bright-line test can apply in a situation where: ▪ there is undivided land that contains a dwelling (which is the seller’s main home) ▪ the land is subdivided into new sections, one that contains the dwelling and another (or others) that does not contain a dwelling, and ▪ the subdivided section (or one of the sections) without a dwelling is sold. The item concludes that the main home exclusion will apply when: ▪ more than 50% of the area of the land in the subdivided section has been used for a dwelling that was the seller’s main home, and ▪ the seller has used the land in the subdivided section in that manner for more than 50% of the time since the seller acquired the undivided land. Example 5: sale of subdivided section of land with no new dwelling  Simon acquires a property as his main home and, due to a change of circumstances, decides to subdivide it after two months. New computer registers (certificates of title) are created for the subdivided section with the dwelling and the subdivided section at the rear of the property that was used as the backyard for Simon’s home (the backyard section). While attempting to sell the backyard section, Simon continues to enjoy the land in the section as his backyard. Simon eventually manages to sell the section 12 months later. The sale of the backyard section is within the bright-line period that would have applied for the undivided property. Simon can use the main home exclusion for the sale because the land in the backyard section was predominantly used in connection with a dwelling that was Simon’s main home for most of (in fact, all of) the time he owned the land.  Example 6: sale of subdivided section of land with new dwelling Same facts as in Example 5 except that immediately after subdividing the backyard section Simon clears the area and begins constructing a new dwelling with surrounding curtilage (a small garden and a garage). The main home exclusion will not apply to the sale of the backyard section of land because the land in the section was not used predominantly for a dwelling that was Simon’s main home for most of the time he owned the land. Simon owned the land for a period of 14 months, but only used the land in the subdivided section for his main home for two months.  In QB 18/17, the item considers when the sale of a lifestyle block is excluded from the bright-line test and considers the farmland and main home exclusions. In the item it is assumed that: ▪ there was a dwelling on the land that was the seller’s main home ▪ none of the other land rules in ss CB 6 to CB 12 of the Income Tax Act 2007 apply to the sale of the land (eg, s CB 6, which applies to the sale of land acquired for the purpose of re-sale), and ▪ none of the exceptions to the main home exclusion apply. The item states that where the land is, or could in its current state, be used for a farming or agricultural business carried on by the owner, the land will be farmland and not residential land and therefore not subject to the bright-line test. Lifestyle blocks are generally not farmland. The main home exclusion will apply where: ▪ more than 50% of the area of the land has been used for the seller’s main home. This includes curtilage and other land used for  residential purposes, and ▪ the land has been used in that manner for more than 50% of the time the seller owned it. The item contains a flowchart that summarises the main steps when determining whether the bright-line test applies to a lifestyle block. The following examples assume that the property has been used as the seller’s main home for all the time they owned the property and that the exceptions to the main home exclusion do not apply. Example 7: Land that because of its area cannot be used as farmland Marama had a one-hectare property that she sold within the bright-line period. The property had a house that she used as her main home. The property also had a small area of grazing land and a larger area of native bush. She kept a few sheep on the grazing land to keep the grass down. The property was not farmland because it wasn’t being worked in a farming or agricultural business carried on by Marama. Nor, given the size of the property, could Marama argue it was capable of being worked as a farming or agricultural business. The property was a hobby farm, not farmland. The main home exclusion is available to Marama because more than 50% of the area of the property was used for her dwelling. The grazing land was an area for her hobbyfarming activity, and the area of native bush was used to enhance her enjoyment and the aesthetic value of her dwelling. Therefore, the sale of Marama’s property within the bright-line period will not be taxed under the bright-line test.  Example 8: Small plot of land that is farmland Uri had a five-hectare property that he used for a commercial rose growing business. A small area of the land is used for his house and the garden around it. The property is farmland because it was being worked in Uri’s agricultural business. The sale of Uri’s property (including the house) within the bright-line period will not be taxed under the bright-line test because the land is not residential land.  Law: IT07 ss CB 6A, CB 16A, YA 1  ¶7-225 Residential exclusion from land disposal provisions for development or division land  The development or division of land may give rise to income upon disposal of the land under s CB 12 or CB 13. Section CB 17(1) provides that neither s CB 12 nor CB 13 will apply if the work involved in the undertaking or scheme is to create or effect a development, division or improvement that is for use in and for the purposes of residing on the land of the person or any member of their family living with them. Section CB 17(2) provides that ss CB 12 and CB 13 will also not apply where the land disposed of: ▪ is a lot that came out of a larger area of land that the person divided into two or more lots, and ▪ the larger area of land was: □ 4,500 square metres or less immediately before subdivision, and □ occupied by the person mainly as residential land for themselves and any family members living with them.  Perhaps the main features of this exclusion are the limit on the size of the land before the scheme commenced and the requirement for occupation of that land as a residence. It should be noted that the provision does not cover trustees of trusts that own the residence. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13, CB 17  ¶7-235 Residential exclusion from land disposal provisions for rezoning gains There is an exclusion under s CB 18 from the rezoning provisions (see s CB 14 and ¶7-135) in relation to the disposal of land if: ▪ the person acquired the land and used, or intended to use, it for residential purposes, and ▪ the person disposed of the land to another person who acquired it for residential purposes. The purpose of acquisition by the other person is ascertained from the circumstances of the disposal and other relevant matters. “Residential purposes” means the person has a purpose of using, or intending to use, the land mainly as a residence for themselves and any members of their family living with them. The term also includes the erection of a dwellinghouse on the land to be occupied as a residence. If the exclusion can be found to have application, it follows that the rezoning provisions do not create assessable income. In the case of farming land, there is also an exclusion under s CB 22. See further at ¶7-280. Law: IT07 ss CB 14, CB 18  ¶7-250 Business premises exclusion from land disposal provisions  There is an exclusion for land used as business premises where its disposal would otherwise give rise to assessable income under any of the land disposal provisions in ss CB 6–CB 11. The person must have acquired and occupied, or erected and occupied, the premises mainly to carry on a substantial business from them. The exclusion applies to land used for the purposes of the business and, if necessary, so much of the land as is required for the reasonable occupation of the premises and the carrying on of the business. It should be noted that under s CB 19(2), the exclusion will not apply to a person who has engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing, or erecting and disposing, of premises for businesses. The notion of what constitutes a regular pattern has been explored by the courts. The High Court thought that a regular pattern of transactions denotes “a similarity or likeness in the transactions … In the same context the word ‘regular’ is used in the sense of recurring at uniform or near uniform intervals … the Court must consider each transaction to assess the degree of similarity … the number of transactions and the intervals of time between each, thereby assessing the degree of uniformity or consistency of occurrence”. The purchase and sale of four properties were found to amount to a pattern, because there was sufficient similarity between the transactions. However, there was not a regular pattern, because the transactions were spread over 13 years. The taxpayer could claim the benefit of the exclusion. See Parry v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,820 at 61,824 and Case C9 (1977) 3 NZTC 60,058. In August 2016, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/07, “Income Tax — Land sale rules — Main home and residential exclusions — Regular pattern of acquiring and disposing, or building and disposing” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 9, October 2016 at 4). The QWBA considers what constitutes a regular pattern for the purposes of the main home (s CB 16A) and residential (s CB 16) exclusions. See the discussion of the QWBA in ¶7-211. Although the item does not specifically consider the exclusion in s CB 19, note that in QB 19/14 (discussed below) the Commissioner  confirmed the approach taken in QB 16/07 to the meaning of “regular pattern” would also apply to the exclusion in s CB 19. If the exclusion applies, then no assessable income is derived under the land disposal provisions referred to above. ▸ Note: On 16 September 2019, Inland Revenue released the tax policy consultation document, “Habitual buying and selling of land”, because of concerns that the current regular pattern restrictions are not working as intended. As currently drafted, taxpayers who habitually buy and sell land can structure around the regular pattern restrictions by using associated persons to carry out separate transactions, or by varying each transaction so that there is no “pattern”. Following consultation, proposed amendments to the regular pattern restrictions in the residential (see ¶7-211), main home (see ¶7-215) and business premises exclusions were included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020. The proposed amendments expand the regular pattern restriction to apply to a group of persons undertaking buying and selling activities together, rather than the activities of a single person. For the purposes of the business premises exclusion, a group of persons will be treated as undertaking buying and selling activities together where: ▪ all persons in the group occupy premises mainly to carry on a substantial business, irrespective of the nature of any business carried on, and ▪ a person, whether or not they also occupy land as business premises, has significant involvement in, or control of, the activities of all those in the group. Example 1  Companies A, B, C and D all occupy their land as business premises mainly to carry on a substantial business. (It does not matter whether the businesses are related.) The same persons have significant involvement in, or control of, the activities of all of the companies (for example, all the companies have the same shareholders). Therefore, companies A, B, C and D form a group of persons who are treated as undertaking buying and selling activities together. Because those buying and selling activities form a regular pattern (the properties are sold at regular intervals), they will be subject to the regular pattern restriction (assuming all the properties were acquired with an intention of resale (see below)). Example taken from the Commentary to the Bill  For the business premises exclusion, the regular pattern restriction currently applies when a person has engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing of, or erecting and disposing of, premises used by the person for a substantial business. This has been interpreted very narrowly to apply only when there is a similarity or likeness between the transactions. In contrast, the regular pattern restriction for the main home exclusion applies when the person has engaged in a regular pattern of acquiring and disposing of residential land used as their main home, and this more general wording has not been interpreted as narrowly. Thus, the proposed amendments also expand the regular pattern restriction in the business premises exclusion to align it with the main home exclusion. This will ensure it applies to any regular pattern of buying and selling land used as business premises, with a focus on the regularity of the transactions rather than on what is done on the land while it is held.  Finally, the proposed amendments clarify that the regular pattern restriction in the business premises exclusion applies only when the land was acquired with a purpose or intention of disposal. This ensures that the restriction is better targeted at people who regularly buy and sell land on a speculative basis. The proposed amendments are intended to apply to land acquired on or after the date of enactment of the Bill, although land acquired before that date will be able to be considered for the purposes of determining whether a group of persons have a regular pattern. QB 19/14 In August 2019, Inland Revenue released QB 19/14, “Income tax – when does the business premises exclusion in s CB 19 apply to preclude land sales from being taxed under ss CB 6 to CB 11?”, which considers the application of s CB 19 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 75). The Commissioner considers that while business premises will typically include a building, there may be instances where land without a building is business premises. For example, a quarry may be business premises even if it does not have a building on it, provided the further requirements of s CB 19 are met. The landowner must have first acquired or erected the premises mainly for the purpose of carrying on a substantial business from them. This is tested when the landowner acquired or erected the premises. The landowner must also have occupied the business premises mainly to carry on a substantial business. “Occupied” in this context means the landowner (which would include their agent or employee) has a physical presence at the business premises and retains the right to exclude others from the property. A physical presence does not necessarily require a human presence at the premises. The presence of structures or equipment may be sufficient. For example, an automated self-service petrol station would satisfy the “occupation” requirement of s CB 19. QB 19/14 confirms that where a landowner leases business premises to another taxpayer, giving them exclusive possession, the landowner does not “occupy” the business premises. Where land is  owned by a trust, the trustees must have acquired/erected and occupied the premises mainly to carry on a substantial business of the trust. Occupation by a beneficiary of the trust mainly to carry on their own substantial business will not be sufficient. The premises must also be used mainly for carrying on a substantial business and the Commissioner considers this requires that the carrying on of the business must be the primary use and must outweigh any other uses, singly or collectively. Situations may arise where a landowner has occupied premises to carry on a substantial business for most, but not all, of the time they owned the land. This might occur where the landowner vacated the premises before sale to give vacant possession, or where the landowner temporarily leased the premises to another taxpayer. In these situations, the exclusion may still apply, provided the landowner occupied the premises mainly to carry on a substantial business. However, QB 19/14 states it will be more difficult to argue that premises were acquired/erected and occupied mainly to carry on a substantial business the longer premises are: ▪ occupied by a third party (and not the landowner) ▪ occupied by the landowner for a non-business use, or ▪ unoccupied. “Carrying on” a business from a location requires some or all of the activities of the business to be conducted continuously or habitually from there. The Commissioner also considers that whether a business is “substantial” is a question of fact. Land that is reserved, with the business premises, for the use of the business will be included within the exclusion. This is limited to an area no greater than what is reasonably required for the occupation of the business premises and the carrying on of the business. In the Commissioner’s opinion, land reserved “with” business premises will usually be in close proximity to the business premises. Where the reserved land is not part of, or immediately adjoining, the business  premises land, the closer it is to the business premises, the more likely it is to be considered reserved “with the premises”. The words “for use of the business” do not necessarily require business activities to be “carried on” from the land. For example, although business activities are unlikely to be carried on from a carpark reserved for staff parking, it would nonetheless be considered reserved for the use of the business. The Commissioner also considers the words contemplate both current and future business uses. Land reserved for the future use of a business might be land not currently in use but kept for the future expansion of the business. The limitation on area of the land is also a question of fact and degree whether the land is “reasonably required”. The Commissioner acknowledges that while some taxpayers may reserve land adjoining the business premises for future expansion, whether all of the land reserved is “required” for the carrying on of the business will depend on the particular situation. It is also important to note that for reserved land to be covered by the business premises exclusion, it must be sold with the business premises land with which is it is reserved. The s CB 19 exclusion provides for apportionment, meaning it may apply to only part of the land sold. For example, where a landowner occupies a single storey of a multi-storey office building as their business premises, the exclusion will apply to the proportion of the total sale price of the land that is attributable to that part of the building. The question of whether a person has engaged in a regular pattern of buying, or building, and selling business premises is also a question of fact and degree. As stated above, QB 19/14 confirms that the discussion in QB 16/07 on what constitutes a regular pattern is also relevant in the s CB 19 context. Generally, at least three prior transactions would be needed. If a landowner sells land covered by the s CB 19 exclusion at a loss, the loss will be capital in nature, so will not reduce the taxpayer’s net income. The sale proceeds are not income (unless a taxing provision  without a business premises exclusion applies), so the cost of the land is not deductible. QB 19/14 also includes a number of examples to explain how the law works, including: Example 2: Business premises of a tenant not the landowner Mungbean Holdings Ltd (MHL) is associated with Mungbean Developments Ltd (MDL), a company carrying on a business of property developments. MHL is in the business of leasing commercial office space. It owns several office buildings including one that it leases to Edamame Transport Ltd (ETL). ETL has exclusive use of the office building for its transport business. MHL sells the office building within 10 years of purchase. The sale is taxable under s CB 10(2) because at the time MHL acquired the office building, MHL was associated with MDL, and MDL was carrying on a property development business. Although the office building was business premises, s CB 19 does not apply because MHL did not occupy the office building to carry on its own business of commercial property leasing. MHL also owns another office building that it occupies exclusively to carry on its commercial leasing activities. If MHL were to sell that building within 10 years of acquiring it, the s CB 19 exclusion would apply, so the land sale proceeds would not be income under s CB 10(2). Example 3: Land with a building that is partly business premises and partly a dwelling Favabean Beanery Ltd (FBL) purchases a building in the suburbs. At the time FBL purchased the building, it was also associated with Favabean Land Dealers Ltd (FLDL), a company carrying on a business of dealing in land. The building comprises a downstairs retail space and a single-bedroom flat upstairs. The downstairs retail space is twice the size of the upstairs flat. FBL purchased the property for the main purpose of carrying on its large-scale bean import business. FBL occupies the downstairs retail space and carries on its large-scale bean import business from there. The upstairs flat is rented to Mr Beane under a residential tenancy for the whole time FBL owns the property. After eight years, FBL sells the building for a profit. Absent s CB 19, the sale of the whole property would be taxable under s CB 9. This is because when FBL acquired the building, FBL was associated with FLDL, which was carrying on a land dealing business, and the land was sold within 10 years. However, because the downstairs retail space was occupied by FBL to carry on its substantial import business, the portion of the sale price attributable to the downstairs retail space is excluded from s CB 9. The portion of the sale price attributable to the upstairs flat is income under s CB 9, because the flat was not business premises, nor reserved with the premises for the use of the business. The cost of the property should be apportioned on the same basis, with only the portion attributable to the upstairs flat being deductible under s DB 23.  Example 4: Business premises vacated before sale Stringbean Prefabrication Ltd (SPL) carries on a substantial business of erecting buildings. SPL purchases bare land intending to build apartments on the land, which SPL will then onsell. However, before building the apartments, SPL decides it needs a new workshop for prefabricating building components. The property it purchased to build the apartments on is in an ideal location for a workshop. Accordingly, instead of building the apartments on the land, SPL erects a workshop from which to carry on its business. SPL then occupies and operates its business out of the workshop. If SPL were to sell the workshop, it would be covered by the s CB 19 exclusion. Even though SPL did not acquire the land “mainly for carrying on a substantial business”, it erected business premises for this purpose. SPL then occupied the workshop mainly for carrying on a substantial business. After three years of occupying the workshop solely to carry on its business, SPL runs into financial difficulties. SPL moves out of the workshop and tries to find a buyer for the property. The workshop is vacant for six months before SPL finally sells it. SPL is still eligible for the s CB 19 exclusion. This is because even though SPL did not occupy the workshop for the last six months, SPL erected and occupied the workshop mainly to carry on a substantial business. SPL carried on a substantial business for three years from the premises and so mainly occupied them for that purpose, taking into account the whole period of ownership, including the last 6 months when the premises were vacant.  Note that a separate business premises exclusion is relevant where the sale is potentially taxable under the bright-line test in s CB 6A. Although these two exclusions are both described as “business premises exclusions”, they are not the same. QB 19/13, “Income tax — When does the business premises exclusion to the bright-line test apply?” discusses the application of the s CB 6A business premises exclusion in more detail (see ¶7-050). The main differences between the two exclusions are as follows: ▪ Section CB 19 relates specifically to the land taxing provisions from ss CB 6 to CB 11. The bright-line business premises exclusion applies only in relation to s CB 6A. ▪ Section CB 19 applies only to land that is the landowner’s business premises (and reserved land). The bright-line business premises exclusion potentially applies where someone else uses the land as business premises.  ▪ Section CB 19 specifically requires the landowner to have acquired and occupied, or erected and occupied, the relevant business premises mainly to carry on a substantial business. The bright-line business premises exclusion does not require the premises to be those of the landowner or the business to be substantial. ▪ Section CB 19 applies to the extent that the land sold is business premises, where the bright-line business premises exclusion applies to all of the land sold or not at all. ▪ Section CB 19 does not apply where the landowner has engaged in a regular pattern of buying or building business premises and selling them. The bright-line business premises exclusion does not have such an exception. Law: IT07 ss CB 6–CB 11, CB 19  ¶7-260 Exclusion from land disposal provisions for development or division for business purposes Section CB 20 provides for a business exclusion from the application of both ss CB 12 and CB 13. Section CB 20 provides that ss CB 12 and CB 13 do not apply if the work involved in the undertaking or scheme is to create or effect a development, division or improvement that is for use in and for the purposes of the carrying on of a business by the person on the land, and the business does not consist of the undertaking or scheme. The business exclusion will overcome the kind of situation addressed in Anzamco Ltd (in liq) v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,522. In that case, the High Court had held that the development and division provisions had application to the disposal of farmland that the taxpayer had developed for farming purposes in the ordinary way. The land disposal provisions at that time were not restricted to specific kinds of land development.  The business exclusion applies to a farming or agricultural business that is not part of a land development business. The exclusion does not apply if the only business carried on is the undertaking or scheme itself: see s CB 20(c). Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13, CB 20  ¶7-270 Farmland exclusion from land disposal provisions for development or division of land Section CB 21 excludes the operation of both ss CB 12 and CB 13 in the case of subdivided farm lots. That is, any amount derived on disposal of subdivided farmland will not be income where: ▪ the land is a lot resulting from the division of a larger area of land into two or more lots ▪ immediately before division, the larger area of land was occupied by the person or the person’s spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner, or both of them, mainly for the purposes of a farming or agricultural business carried on by either or both of them ▪ the area and nature of the land disposed of mean that it is then capable of being worked as an economic unit as a farming or agricultural business, and ▪ the land was disposed of mainly for the purpose of use in a farming or agricultural business. “Farming or agricultural business” Section CB 21(2) provides that the circumstances of the disposal of the land are relevant to the decision on whether the land was disposed of mainly for the purpose of using the land in a farming or agricultural business. The circumstances include: ▪ the consideration for the disposal of the land  ▪ current prices paid for land in the area ▪ the terms of the disposal ▪ a zoning or other classification relating to the land, and ▪ the proximity of the land to any other land being used or developed for uses other than farming or agricultural uses. “Person’s spouse” In public binding ruling BR Pub 04/04 (effective for an indefinite period from 1 June 2004), the Commissioner confirmed that the words “the taxpayer’s spouse” in ss CB 21 and CB 22 did not restrict the meaning of “taxpayer” to natural persons. (As part of the income tax legislation rewrite process, the word “taxpayer” was replaced with “person”.) “Person” in this context could include non-natural persons such as companies and trusts. Accordingly, the exemptions provided by s CB 21 apply to a taxpayer that is a non-natural person if the other requirements are met. However, from a structuring point of view, it is important to note that the farming or agricultural business referred to in s CB 21 must have been carried on by the person, their spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner or both. Consequently, if a trust owned the farmland but leased it to another person, who then carried on the farming or agricultural business, the exclusion under s CB 21 would not be available. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 4, May 2004 at 4 and James Bull Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,001. “Economic unit” The Commissioner’s views on activities that represent a farming or an agricultural business are outlined in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 13, May 1995 at 15 and 16. These include agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, beekeeping, poultry farming, animal husbandry, dairy farming and sharemilking.  The Commissioner accepts that forestry does fall within the definition for the purposes of s CB 21. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 4, April 1998 at 43 and ¶27-010, ¶28-017. There have been conflicting decisions on the meaning of an “economic unit” as illustrated in the following case examples: Example 1: An economic unit is one that is capable of making reasonable profits on a stable basis or a property that is capable of yielding a reasonable standard of living for its owner, without him or her having to resort to secondary employment and after making due return on the capital invested. On the basis of a report from a farm advisory officer with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, the High Court found that the farm reached the minimum standard for an economic unit. See O’Toole v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,045.  Example 2: The land must be capable of being worked as an economic unit, ie a farming or agricultural business at the time of sale. It is not sufficient that the land is capable of being developed into an economic unit. Any change or modification of a previous farm use will no doubt require expenditure of some time, effort and money, and there may be marginal cases where it is not easy to draw the line. However, the land must have the present capability. Long-term development possibilities involving the injection of large capital sums and distant returns could not possibly satisfy the requirements of the exclusion. See C of IR v Bruhns (1989) 11 NZTC 6,075 (CA).  Example 3: A farming couple who subdivided their farmland into nine lots were assessed on the profits derived on the sale of two lots of 8.3ha and 11.1ha respectively, because neither lot was capable of being worked as an economic unit. The taxpayers unsuccessfully argued that each block could be established as an economic unit if it were converted to a lamb-fattening operation and sown with a certain type of chicory pasture. The purchaser of each lot ran deer on the land but had other employment. Neither lot was capable of yielding a reasonable standard of living for its owner, without the owner having to resort to secondary employment. See Case S90 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,565.  Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13, CB 21  ¶7-280 Farmland exclusion from land disposal provisions for rezoning gains Under s CB 22 there is an exclusion from the rezoning provisions (¶7-135) in relation to the disposal of land if: ▪ the person (person A) acquired the land and they, their spouse or partner or both of them used, or intended to use, the land mainly for the purposes of a farming or agricultural business carried on by them, their spouse or partner or both of them, and ▪ person A disposed of the land to another person (person B) mainly for the purposes of the continuing use of the land in a farming or agricultural business. Person B’s (ie the purchaser’s) purposes in acquiring the land are ascertained from the circumstances of the disposal arising after person A (ie the vendor) acquired the land (with the exception of the rezoning factors creating this category of income). Activities that may constitute a farming or agricultural business are referred to at ¶7270. In these situations, vendors should ascertain the intentions of purchasers to ensure that the desired exclusions apply. If the exclusion applies, the rezoning provisions will not create assessable income. Law: IT07 ss CB 14, CB 22  ¶7-290 Exclusion from land disposal provisions — development or division to earn rents Section CB 23 provides that ss CB 12 and CB 13 do not apply if the work involved in the undertaking or scheme is to create or effect a development, division or improvement that is for use in and for the purposes of deriving income from the land as described in s CC 1, eg rents, premiums, fines, goodwill payments or other revenues derived by the owner of land from any lease, licence, easement or from the grant of any right to take profits (as described at ¶7-500). The scope  of the exclusion appears to be directed at a development involving the erection or modification of a property for future rental. A change of purpose may not prevent application of the exclusion. This is provided the undertaking or scheme is commenced for the purpose of deriving rental income. Example 1: Two property developers purchased and extensively renovated a block of flats intending to retain them for rental income over the long term. Although the flats were sold a short time later at a good price, the Taxation Review Authority accepted that the taxpayers had not sought a short-term capital gain. The exclusion applied. See Case K31 (1988) 10 NZTC 280.  Example 2: A section of land was originally purchased with the intention of erecting two flats. The purchasers intended to derive rental income from one flat, while selling the second flat at cost to close relatives. Soon after commencement of the project, the taxpayers decided to sell both flats. The original purpose to rent one flat was abandoned early on, with the purpose being then to sell it. Since the development was undertaken for sale and not to obtain rental income, the exclusion did not apply. See Case N59 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,457.  If the exclusion applies, it follows that assessable income does not arise under the applicable provisions. Law: IT07 ss CB 12, CB 13, CB 23, CC 1  TAX ACCOUNTING ¶7-360 Cost of purchase of land Land whose sale is subject to the land disposal provisions is revenue account property. A deduction is permitted for the cost of revenue account property under s DB 23. The capital limitation (see ¶10-075) does not apply. The general permission (see ¶10-021) must still be satisfied and the other general limitations still apply (see ¶10-071).  ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to clarify that the cost of revenue account property is deductible even if it was not known when the costs were incurred that the property would be subject to tax on sale, or if the property was used privately while it was held. Section DB 23 is currently subject to the general permission. However, in some situations involving the land sale rules the required connection between expenditure on acquiring or improving the land and income may not be present. This is because, at the time the expenditure is incurred, it may not be known whether the disposal of the land will be taxed. This may be the case for land that is taxed if sold within a particular timeframe (eg land sold within five years for the bright-line test), or if certain circumstances eventuate during the time the land is held (eg if a division or development is carried on). In addition, s DB 23 is currently subject to the private limitation. This means that, technically, where there is private use of land that is subject to tax on sale, part of the costs of acquisition and improvements should also be denied to take into account the private benefit received. It was intended that the cost of acquiring and improving land that is taxed under any of the land sale rules would be fully deductible to ensure that only the net proceeds are income (or a loss), and this is how the provision operated before the rewrite of the Income Tax Act. Thus, the proposed amendment provides that s DB 23 supplements the general permission and overrides the capital limitation and the private limitation. The amendment is intended to apply retrospectively from 1 April 2008, the commencement date of the Income Tax Act 2007. If land is acquired together with other property, the cost of acquisition must be apportioned between the land and the other property. The cost base for the calculation of the income arising under the land disposal provisions is generally historical cost. No allowance is made for the effects of inflation in an endeavour to isolate just the developer’s profit. See Lowe v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,712 (PC).  In determining cost price, the Commissioner may accept use of the government valuation relating to the sections sold as the basis for both original cost and for any additional costs since acquisition. The government valuation might not be used if development occurs over such a protracted period that total costs are not known by the time the first sections are sold. Another situation in which the government valuation might not be used is where it is inappropriate to allocate cost on a straight area basis because, for example, the block of land comprises both areas that are swampy and areas that are well drained, or both sloping and level areas, or because sections are sold over a number of years. In the absence of a government valuation, the land must be valued at its true market value, being what a prudent buyer would pay, and not its value to the owner. The deduction for the cost of purchase is effectively deferred until disposal of the land. No deduction is allowed for the cost at balance date while the land continues to be subject to development. See ¶7370 and ¶10-052. The courts had reached the same conclusion under the general law. See Murray Darnill Ltd v Taxation Review Authority (No 2) (1994) 16 NZTC 11,126 and Garwen Holdings Ltd v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,396. The exception to historical cost as the cost base is for a major development or division. The cost becomes the market value of the land at the commencement of the undertaking or scheme. This eliminates any inflationary gain over the holding period before the land is committed to the undertaking or scheme. See ¶7-125. In Holdaway v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,104, the High Court held that the preferred approach to valuation is by reference to comparable sales if available, rather than a method that involves taking a government valuation and indexing it back to the scheme’s commencement date. The case also confirmed that the Commissioner should value the land at the time of the scheme’s commencement and not at the time of the sale of the land. It would be prudent for the person to obtain an independent valuation to support the calculation of profit returned as income.  Note that if the land is mining land subject to ss CU 2 and DU 3, those provisions override s DB 23. See ¶28-090. Question we’ve been asked In November 2015, Inland Revenue released QWBA, QB 15/13, “Income Tax — whether the cost of acquiring an option to acquire revenue account land is deductible” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 64). The QWBA examines the situation where revenue account land is acquired through the exercise of an option and considers whether the cost of acquiring the option is deductible. The QWBA concludes that the cost of acquiring the option is deductible as follows (subject to the general permission being satisfied and no general limitation applying): ▪ If the financial arrangements rules apply to the option (and consequent agreement for sale and purchase of the land), the cost of the option and the other consideration for the land are, in effect, deductible. Those costs will be taken into account under the FA rules, and the FA rules will then establish the cost base of the land, which will be deductible under s DB 23 on the ultimate sale of the land. ▪ Where the FA rules do not apply, the cost of acquiring the option is deductible under s DB 23 because it is part of the cost of acquiring the revenue account land (together with the other consideration for the land. The QWBA also briefly considers the deductibility of the cost of an option that is itself on revenue account and concludes that, provided the general permission was satisfied, the cost would be deductible under s DB 23. Law: IT07 ss DB 23, DB 27, DB 29  ¶7-365 Ring-fencing of rental losses With effect from 1 April 2019, for the 2019–20 and later income years, subpart EL provides for the ring-fencing of rental losses in an effort to level the playing field between property speculators/investors  and home buyers. Under the provisions, speculators and investors are no longer able to offset tax losses from their residential properties against their other income (eg salary or wages, or business income) to reduce their income tax liability. The losses may be used in future years, when the properties are making profits, or if the person is taxed on the sale of land. In summary, the rules do the following: ▪ limit a person’s deductions for expenditure incurred in relation to residential land to income derived from the land ▪ suspend deductions for the excess expenditure for the income year in which the expenditure is incurred ▪ provide that the excess amounts are carried forward to later income years in which the person derives residential income, and ▪ release the excess amounts on fully taxed disposals of land. Details of the rules in ss EL 1 to EL 20 are set out below. Property subject to the rules Residential rental property The provisions apply to “residential rental property”. This is defined as meaning “residential land” for which the owner is allowed a deduction relating to the use or disposal of the land. Note that land that is residential land for part of an income year is also included. This means that if there is a change of use of residential land in an income year (eg from residential rental to commercial rental), it remains residential rental property for that year and any ring-fenced deductions in relation to the property may be used in that year against any other income from the property (eg commercial rent). “Residential land” is defined as: ▪ land that has a dwelling on it  ▪ land for which the owner has an arrangement to build a dwelling on it, or ▪ bare land that may be used for building a dwelling under the relevant operative district plan, but does not include land that is: ▪ used predominantly as business premises, or ▪ farmland. This is the same definition as applies for the purposes of the brightline test and is discussed at ¶7-050. Note that the definition of “residential rental property” is not confined to property in New Zealand. Overseas rental properties of New Zealand residents are also subject to the ring-fencing rules. Residential portfolio A person’s “residential portfolio” means one or more residential rental properties that they hold in a portfolio in an income year, and includes all properties the person has included in their portfolio at any time during the period they have a residential portfolio, whether or not they still own it. The default position is that the loss ring-fencing rules apply on a portfolio basis, meaning that investors can offset deductions for one rental property against income from other rental properties — essentially calculating their overall profit or loss across their portfolio. However, taxpayers may elect to apply the rules on a property-byproperty basis and any property a person makes this election for is excluded from the definition of “residential portfolio”. Example 1: Applying the rules on the default portfolio basis Minerva owns two residential rental properties. She applies the ring-fencing rules on the default portfolio basis. In the 2019–20 income year, one property returned gross rental income of $20,000 and deductions for that property were $12,000. The second property returned $25,000 gross rental income and deductions for that property were $30,000. In her tax return, Minerva will include $45,000 gross rental income. She can  use all $42,000 of the deductions for the portfolio in that year; none of the deductions are ring-fenced. Minerva will have net rental income of $3,000 from the portfolio. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 56.  Property-by-property basis A person may elect to apply the rules on a property-by-property basis under s EL 6 for one or more properties. This means that each property the election is made for is looked at separately and deductions for one cannot be offset against income from another. The election can be made regardless of whether the person owns residential rental properties other than the one(s) for which they make an election or whether those other properties are included in a residential portfolio. A person makes an election to treat a property on a property-byproperty basis by taking a tax position on that basis in their return of income for the income year in which the property becomes their residential rental property. The election remains in effect for income years in which the person continues to take that tax position. However, if the person changes their tax position, the property becomes a property included in a residential portfolio. A transitional provision provided that for residential rental properties held at the start of the 2019–20 income year, the person had to make the election in the return of income for that income year. Example 2: Applying the rules on a property-by-property basis Riley owns three residential rental properties. He applies the ring-fencing rules on the default portfolio basis for two of the properties (A and B). He elects to apply the rules on a property-by-property basis for the third property (C). Riley decided to apply the rules on a property-by-property basis for property C because he was associated with a land developer when he acquired property C, so if he ends up selling it within 10 years the sale will be taxed. In the 2019–20 income year, the portfolio properties (A and B) returned combined gross rental income of $50,000. Deductions for those properties totalled $45,000. Property C returned gross rental income of $20,000, and deductible expenses for that property totalled $23,000. In his 2019–20 income tax return, Riley includes net rental income of $5,000 from the two portfolio properties (A and B). He can use $20,000 of the deductions for property C. The remaining $3,000 of deductions from property C cannot be used against the  income from the portfolio properties (A and B) or against any other income Riley has. The $3,000 of excess deductions from property C are carried forward to the next income year and added to the deductions for property C in that year. If property C ends up being taxed on sale, the net profit or loss for that specific property would be known, and any ring-fenced deductions in excess of the net income from the sale will be released and used against any other income Riley has. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 57.  Exclusions from the operation of the rules Note that the following types of property are also excluded from the operation of the rules under specific provisions: ▪ a person’s main home (s EL 9) ▪ property held on revenue account (s EL 10) ▪ property held by certain persons and entities (s EL 11) ▪ property to which the mixed-use asset rules apply (s EL 12), and ▪ property provided as employee accommodation. Each of these exclusions is discussed below. Allocation of deductions The ring-fencing rules in s EL 4 apply for an income year when a person has deductible expenditure or loss (excluding the cost of revenue account property under s DB 23) in relation to one or more residential rental properties in their residential portfolio. The amount of the deduction that may be allocated to the income year must be no more than the amount of the person’s residential income for the income year. An amount identified as a person’s residential income may only be counted once for the deduction allocation rules. A person’s residential income is the following amounts they derive for an income year in relation to residential land: ▪ rental income, being amounts derived from the use of land under ss CC 1 to CC 2  ▪ depreciation recovery income ▪ net income under the land sale provisions (ss CB 6A to CB 15) from the disposal of property in their portfolio ▪ net income the person would have if their only income were income referred to in the above bullet points from other land held on revenue account (see below). If the property is being dealt with on a property-by-property basis, both the deductions allocated and the residential income derived must relate solely to that particular property. To the extent that the person’s deduction exceeds their residential income, the excess amount is: ▪ suspended as a deduction for the income year ▪ carried forward to a later income year in which the person derives residential income, and ▪ added to their deductions related to their residential rental properties for the later income year. Again, if the property is being dealt with on a property-by-property basis, any excess deductions can only be carried forward to a later income year in which the person derives residential income from that particular property. When residential rental properties sold When, in an income year, a person disposes of the last of the properties in their residential portfolio or, if they have chosen to apply the rules on a property-by-property basis, they dispose of that property, and they have an unused excess amount of deductions that have been carried forward, the treatment of the unused excess will generally depend on whether the property or portfolio has been fully taxed. Fully taxed on disposal  Where all the properties in a portfolio have been taxed on disposal in either the current or an earlier income year, any unused excess is released from the limited allocation rule for the current year: s EL 5(2). In other words, where all the residential rental properties in a portfolio have been taxed on disposal, any unused excess is released from the ring-fencing rule on disposal of the final property. The same applies to any unused excess in relation to a property dealt with on a property-by-property basis if the person derives income under the land sales provisions on the disposal of that property: s EL 7(2). Note, however, that this treatment does not apply where the excess amount has been transferred from another property — see below. Not fully taxed on disposal However, where not all of the properties in a portfolio have been taxed on disposal or no income is derived under the land sale provisions on the disposal of a property dealt with on a property-byproperty basis, any unused excess amount is not released. The ringfencing rule continues to apply to that amount for income years in which the person derives residential income and it is treated as a transfer to another residential rental property for an income year in which the person derives residential income: ss EL 5(3) and EL 7(3). Example 3: Taxed sale of individual basis property Nikita has three residential rental properties — two in a portfolio (properties A and B), and one which he applies the ring-fencing rules on a property-by-property basis for (property C). He also has salary income of $70,000. Property C has accumulated ringfenced deductions of $80,000. Nikita decides to sell property C. The sale is taxed and gives rise to a net gain of $60,000. Nikita uses $60,000 of the ring-fenced deductions against the net sale income from property C. Because Nikita has applied the ringfencing rules on a property-by-property basis for this property, the remaining excess deductions of $20,000 are unfenced and used against Nikita’s salary income.  Example 4: Treatment of ring-fenced deductions on disposal of all properties in a portfolio Jairus owns a portfolio of two residential properties; he has not previously owned other residential properties. In the 2019–20 income year, he sells both of his properties for a total net taxable gain of $10,000. He also has gross rental income of $20,000 from the  properties in that year, rental deductions for the properties of $35,000 and a salary of $70,000. Jairus has a total of $30,000 “residential income” from the portfolio for the year (the rental income and the net taxable gain from the sale of the properties). He can use $30,000 of the rental deductions against his residential income. Because the sales of both properties in the portfolio were taxed, the remaining $5,000 of rental deductions are unfenced and can be used against Jairus’ salary income. If the sale of only one of the properties had been taxed, any excess deductions would remain ring-fenced. The excess would not be able to be used against Jairus’ salary income but would have to be carried forward to be used against any future residential income Jairus has. Examples taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 58–59.  Transferred amounts In the event that an unused excess amount is transferred (under ss EL 5(3) or EL 7(3)) to a property that is included in another residential portfolio that has been fully taxed on all disposals and the final property in that residential portfolio is disposed of, the amount of the excess that can be released from the ring-fencing rule is reduced by the total unused excess amount transferred. The same applies if an unused excess amount is transferred to a property that is dealt with on a property-by-property basis and income is derived on disposal of that property. This ensures that where an amount of excess deductions from a property that was not taxed on sale has been transferred to another property or portfolio that has been taxed on sale, the amount that would otherwise be released on taxable sale of the property or divestment of the portfolio is reduced by the transferred amount. However, these unused deductions are able to be carried forward. Main home exclusion The ring-fencing rule does not apply to residential land for an income year if more than 50% of the land is used for most of the income year by the person as their main home: s EL 9. A “main home” is defined, for a person, as the one dwelling that is mainly used as a residence by the person and with which they have the greatest connection (if they have more than one).  In relation to trust property, the land is excluded when more than 50% of the land is used for most of the income year by a beneficiary of the trust as their main home and a principal settlor of the trust does not have a separate main home. For these purposes, a “principal settlor” for a trust means a settlor whose settlements for the trust are the greatest, or greatest equal, by market value. Inland Revenue guidance on the main home exclusion from the bright-line test (see ¶7-215) is relevant to the extent the exclusions are the same. The difference between the two is that for the brightline exclusion the land has to have been used predominantly for the main home for most of the bright-line period (before 23 March 2020, for most of the time it was owned), whereas the test for the ringfencing rules is whether it has been predominantly used as the main home for most of the income year. Exclusion for land held on revenue account The ring-fencing rule does not apply to residential land that will give rise to income under s CB 7 when disposed of: s EL 10. This is land held in dealing, development, subdivision, and building businesses. In addition, residential land that will give rise to income under any of the other land sales provisions (ss CB 6A to CB 15) on disposal, regardless of when disposal occurs, may also be excluded from the operation of the rules. However, for this land to be excluded, two additional requirements must also be met. First, the person must notify the Commissioner that the land is held on revenue account by the date for filing their return of income for the later of: ▪ the income year in which they acquire the land ▪ the income year in which the land becomes land that, when disposed of, will give rise to income under the land sales provisions, or ▪ for land that is held at the start of the 2019–20 income year and is land that, when disposed of, will give rise to income under the land sales provisions, the 2019–20 income year.  Second, the person must be able to identify separately the deductions relating to the revenue account property. The exception to this requirement is where all of the person’s residential land (other than land excluded under the main home exclusion, the mixed-asset exclusion or the employee accommodation exclusion) has given rise to income under the land sales provisions or will give rise to such income, regardless of when disposal occurs, and they have notified the Commissioner. Thus, only land that will definitely be taxed on sale and this is acknowledged by the taxpayer will be excluded, not land that may be taxed on sale if certain contingencies occur (eg being sold within a particular time period — such as under the bright-line test). In addition, the taxpayer is only required to separately identify the deductions that relate to that revenue account property, unless all of the properties they have are on revenue account, in which case it is unnecessary. Exclusion for property held by certain persons and entities The ring-fencing rule does not apply to any residential land owned by a company, other than a close company, or a person or entity listed in sch 36 (Government enterprises): s EL 11. Exclusion for mixed-use assets Residential land that is a mixed-use asset under s DG 3 (see ¶10035) is also excluded from the ring-fencing rule: s EL 12. Exclusion for property provided as employee accommodation Residential land provided by a person to their employees or other workers for accommodation in connection with their employment or service is excluded from the ring-fencing rule: s EL 13. However, this exclusion does not apply if the person is associated with the employees or workers, unless it is necessary for the person to provide the accommodation because of the nature or remoteness of a business carried on by them. Example 5: Accommodation provided to associated employee  Bill is a farm manager. He is provided with accommodation at a house on a nearby property (which is not farmland), given the remote location of the farm and work hours required. Other farm workers are also provided with accommodation in the area. The farming business is owned by a company, which also owns the house Bill is provided with and the other residential land with the accommodation for employees and contractors. Bill and the company are associated persons. The accommodation is provided to the workers in connection with their employment or service. The land with the accommodation provided to the non-associated workers is therefore within the employee accommodation exclusion (s EL 13(1)). Because Bill is associated with the company, there is a further requirement for the exclusion for employee accommodation to apply. This is that it is necessary to provide the accommodation due to the nature or remoteness of the business carried on by the company. That requirement is met because of the work hours required and the remote location of the farm. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 56.  Continuity rules for companies Companies cannot carry unused excess deductions forward to a later year unless they satisfy the shareholder continuity requirements for carrying forward losses under ss IA 5 and IP 3 (see ¶18-023 and ¶18-025): s EL 14. Transfer between companies in wholly-owned group Section EL 15 allows ring-fenced deductions to be transferred between companies in a wholly-owned group. The transfer is treated as made when both the transferor and the transferee take tax positions on that basis in their tax returns for the relevant income year. Transferred deductions remain ring-fenced, so they are only able to be used in the relevant income year to the extent the transferee company has residential rental or land sale income. Any remaining deductions will be carried forward and will remain ringfenced. Interposed entities — residential land-rich entities Without rules to deal with interposed entities, taxpayers could get around the ring-fencing rules by interposing an entity (eg a company) to separate a loan (and interest deductions) from the residential rental property, so the interest deductions are not subject to ringfencing.  Specific rules have therefore been included to deal with the interposing of entities: ss EL 16 to EL 19. The interposed entity rules apply to deductible interest on borrowings to acquire an interest in an entity that is, for a particular income year, a “residential land-rich entity”. To the extent the portion of the person’s interest expenditure is more than their share of net residential income, the excess is ring-fenced and carried forward to a later income year in which the entity derives residential income: s EL 16. Residential land-rich entity A “residential land-rich entity” is defined as: ▪ a close company, partnership, or look-through company if more than 50% of its assets by value are residential land, or ▪ a trustee of a trust whose property includes residential rental property if more than 50% of the trust’s assets by value are residential land. In either case, it does not matter whether the land is owned directly or indirectly. For these purposes, the value of land, including an improvement to land, is the following amount, as applicable: ▪ the amount established by the later of— □ the land’s most recent capital value or annual value as set by a local authority, or □ either the cost of the land on acquisition or, if the transaction involves an associated person, its market value. ▪ for a leasehold estate in land, the market value of the land which the person may establish through a valuation made by a registered valuer no more than three years before the end of the income year. Assets other than land are valued using:  ▪ for property with an adjusted tax value, its adjusted tax value ▪ for other property, its market value. All assets are valued at the end of the income year. Thus, the 50% “residential land-rich entity” threshold takes into account all residential properties, not just those within the scope of the ring-fencing rules. This ensures that the interposed entity rule applies even if, for example, the main home is held in the same entity as a rental property (which would often be worth less than the main home). Calculating interest expenditure and net residential income For the purposes of determining the ring-fenced amount under s EL 16, formulas for calculating a person’s interest expenditure and net residential income are provided in s EL 17. A person’s interest expenditure is calculated using the following formula: applied capital percentage × interest on borrowings Where: applied capital percentage is the percentage of the entity’s capital, as at the end of the income year, that it has used to acquire residential rental property, and interest on borrowings is the amount of interest expenditure the person has incurred for the income year in relation to the amount borrowed. The applied capital percentage definition has the effect of essentially regarding all of the entity’s capital (both debt and equity) as split on a pro rata basis between the different investments the capital has funded. This was seen as easier to apply than a definition requiring taxpayers to trace the use of specific funds. A person’s share of net residential income is calculated using the following formula:  person’s interest × entity’s net residential income Where: person’s interest is, as applicable,— (i) when the entity is a company, the person’s voting interest in the company measured at the end of the income year (ii) when the entity is the trustee of a trust, the value of the person’s interest in residential rental property that is trust property as a percentage of the trust’s assets, measured at the end of the income year, and entity’s net residential income is the amount of the net income for the corresponding tax year that the entity would have in the absence of s EL 4 (ie if the ring-fencing rule did not apply), if the only income derived by the entity were residential income. Note that if the entity is a partnership or look-through company and it has chosen to apply the ring-fencing rules on a property-by-property basis for a particular property, certain modifications are made to the above formulas: s EL 18. The applied capital percentage formula is read as if the residential rental property were the particular property and the residential income derived by the person for the income year from that particular property is treated as their share of net residential income. For a detailed discussion on the ring-fencing rules and further examples providing more detailed guidance on how the rules apply in a range of situations, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 53–66. Allocation of deductions for bright-line disposals of land A special ring-fencing rule has applied in relation to deductions on the disposal of land subject to the bright-line test under s CB 6A since 1 October 2015. This rule was previously contained in former ss DB 18A and DB 18AB, but with the introduction of the ring-fencing rules for all residential land, those sections were repealed and  replaced by s EL 20 with effect from 1 April 2019. The ring-fencing rule for bright-line disposals is discussed at ¶7-050. Law: IT07 subpart EL, ss CB 16A(3), YA 1  ¶7-370 Deduction of development costs for land Costs associated with land subject to the land disposal provisions can be expected to be allowed as a deduction under the general permission. The costs represent expenditure incurred in deriving assessable income. It is difficult to envisage how deduction of the costs could be prevented by the capital limitation, because the costs relate to revenue account property (rather than capital assets) of the taxpayer. Timing of the deduction for a cost may be an issue in some cases. The cost may be found to have an unexpired portion at balance date to prevent deduction in full by that year-end. Thornton Estates Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,577 (CA) confirmed application of the provisions on prepayments to land developments. See further at ¶10052. Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DB 23, EA 3  ¶7-371 Deduction of holding costs for land Holding costs are costs such as interest, rates, insurance, and repairs and maintenance expenditure that are incurred as a result of owning land. It is generally accepted that, to the extent that land is used to earn taxable income, holding costs are deductible. So, if a person owns a rental property, holding costs are deductible in full (subject to the new rental ring-fencing rules – see ¶7-365) because those costs relate to the taxable rental income. Equally, if land is held by a land dealer, holding costs are generally deductible in full because those costs relate to the taxable income from the sale of the land. Interest is allowed as a deduction for most companies, without the need to establish a connection with the production of assessable  income. That principle would, for example, permit a company that is not a qualifying company to deduct the interest payable on a borrowing raised to purchase bare land that is retained for an extended period before committal to a development or division scheme. A non-corporate land owner would need to establish that any interest cost is expected to produce assessable income before a deduction for the expense would be allowed. See further at ¶10-650.  ▸ Note: In October 2019, Inland Revenue released a consultation document, “Holding costs for privately used land that is taxable on sale”. The document considers the rules for the deductibility of holding costs for land that is taxable on sale and is used privately (in whole or in part) while it is held. For example, this will arise where a bach or second home is sold within five years so that the gain from the sale is taxable under the bright-line test. This will also arise where a person regularly purchases properties to renovate and sell, and lives in the properties while they own them. The document considers three options for the deductibility of holding costs for land subject to income tax on sale that is used privately. These options are: ▪ apportioning the holding costs between the taxable gain on sale and the private use of the land while it is held ▪ allowing deductions for all holding costs, even though there is private use, and ▪ denying deductions for all holding costs for periods of private use. While it is acknowledged that an apportionment approach would arguably be the most accurate option, the document notes that it would not be consistent with other areas of New Zealand’s tax law where no apportionment is required. Therefore, officials’ current view is that denying deductions for all holding costs for periods of private use would be the best option. The document also considers the tax treatment of holding costs relating to land that is not actively used and is taxable on sale. If  deductions are denied as a result of private use, it is necessary to determine whether unused or vacant land should be treated as being used privately or for income earning purposes. The document proposes that the treatment of vacant or unused land as either private or income earning could depend on the other uses of the land during the period of ownership. This would mean that: ▪ where land is otherwise actively used either privately or for income-earning purposes, any vacant or unused days could be treated similarly ▪ where land is used for both income-earning and private purposes and there are more than 62 days of vacant or unused time, the current “mixed-use asset rules” could continue to apply. Where land is wholly vacant or unused, the use could be considered income earning if: ▪ it is held for a business of dealing in, developing, or building on land ▪ it is held for another income-earning purpose (eg land purchased to expand a current business onto, or to erect a rental property), or ▪ the taxpayer otherwise informs the Commissioner at the time of purchase that the land was acquired solely with an intention of resale for profit. In all other situations where land is wholly vacant or unused the use would be considered private. Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DB 7  ¶7-372 Averaging costs over all land disposed In some instances, it may be appropriate to average costs over all of the land sold. This is likely to be a sensible approach in relation to the development or division of a substantial block of land, where a  range of costs may be incurred on the block as a whole rather than in relation to specific portions of it. Costs incurred in the provision of road access and domestic amenities within the block could be examples. The object of the exercise must be to adopt an approach that best represents the income derived from disposal of the land. Example: A taxpayer purchased land for market gardening, but later subdivided it into residential lots for resale to produce income from an undertaking or a scheme commenced within 10 years. To calculate the assessable profit, the taxpayer added the cost price of the land to the remaining estimated development costs and divided the resulting figure by the total number of sections. The taxpayer, therefore, obtained an average cost per section, and this was deducted from the amount received upon sale to give the net profit arising on the sale of each section. The Commissioner accepted this approach, and the Court of Appeal confirmed it. The Court also allowed projected holding costs and development expenses to be included in the profit calculation and to be deducted, even though the costs had not been incurred at that time. See Lowe v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,006.  One proposition that underpinned the Court’s conclusion in the Lowe case was the notion that in some cases the assessment of income may call for the exercise of judgment. The allocation of costs, the Court observed, requires the exercise of judgment and is not a simple matter of arithmetical calculation. However, any cost allocation is to be made in accordance with recognised commercial accounting practices. In some matters of accounting, an honest and careful estimation is the most that can be expected or achieved, the Court added.  ¶7-380 Timing of income derivation from land The general timing provisions for the allocation of income or allowable expenditure are found in ss BD 3 and BD 4. In the absence of any specific timing regime under Pt E, assessable income is recognised in the income year when derived, and allowable expenditure is deductible when incurred. Examples of specific timing regimes are those relating to certain income from leases (¶5-115) and income derived on compulsory acquisition of land (¶5-122).  The Australian case, Gasparin v FC of T 94 ATC 4280, specifically addressed the issue of when income from the sale of land is derived. The case involved a land developer who had entered into a number of agreements for the sale of various allotments. The agreements became unconditional before balance date but were not settled until after balance date. The issue was whether income from the sales was derived when the agreements became unconditional (before balance date) or when the sales were settled (after balance date). The Full Federal Court of Australia held that income is derived when a legal debt arises in respect of the property disposed of. Generally, this does not occur until settlement takes place. Although a vendor may demand specific performance or damages under an unconditional contract before the conveyance of title, the vendor is not entitled to sue for the purchase price as a debt. No legal debt for the purchase price arises until title is due to be conveyed. The Commissioner has accepted that Gasparin is authoritative law in New Zealand. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 5, June 2004 at 34. Inland Revenue concludes at 40: … that the derivation occurs when a sale takes place and a debt arise which can be sued upon and generally this will be the same time as the vendor loses their dispositive power. While a debt may arise at the time an unconditional contract is signed, this will not always be the case. When considering when derivation occurs it is important to consider what will give the correct reflex of the taxpayer’s income. The item also emphasises that the financial arrangements rules must be taken into account in cases of a deferred settlement. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 1, January 1999 at 7. The effects of inflation are to be disregarded in the calculation of the assessable income. See Lowe v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,712 (PC). Disposal of land at less than market value An anti-avoidance provision exists to prevent land that is subject to the land disposal provisions from being disposed of for less than market value. Where land is disposed of for no consideration or less  than market value consideration it is deemed to be disposed of for its market value (s GC 1). Law: IT07 ss BD 3, BD 4, GC 1  ¶7-385 Accounting for amounts from long-term construction contracts Accounting for amounts arising from long-term construction contracts is an area of difficulty. Such projects, for example, buildings, bridges, ships and dams, usually extend over a number of income years. The consequence of this is that the timing of measurement of both assessable income and allowable deductions becomes subjective. There are two commonly used methods for accounting for long-term construction contracts: ▪ the completed contracts method, which recognises no income until the contract has been completed, and ▪ the percentage of completion method, which recognises anticipated contract profits progressively on a yearly basis over the term of the contract. There are no specific provisions relating to long-term contracts, so assessable income is recognised by the core timing provisions in tandem with relevant case law. Example: A roofing contract provided for progress payments during the term of the contract. The court held that based on the terms of the contract, the percentage of completion method was the correct basis of income recognition. See HW Coyle Ltd v C of IR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,558.  Before 1 January 2018, NZIAS 11 Construction Contracts dealt with accounting for profit on construction contracts in the financial statements of contractors. The standard required that the percentage of completion method should be used when the outcome of the  contract could be reliably estimated. Where the outcome could not be reliably estimated, the standard required contract revenue to be recognised only to the extent that the contract costs incurred were recoverable (the cost recovery method). NZ IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers applies for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 (originally 1 January 2017), although the new standard could be voluntarily adopted before that date. The standard replaces several existing standards and introduces a new revenue recognition model for all contracts with customers. The standard allows for revenue to be recognised over time, in a manner that best reflects the company’s performance, or at a point in time, when control of the good or service is transferred to the customer. New criteria are included to determine when revenue should be recognised over time. Some contracts that are currently accounted for under the percentage of completion method may require revenue to be recognised on contract completion under the new standard. The High Court has affirmed that the recognition of total profit upon completion was the correct accounting method in a particular income year for a company engaged in the construction of domestic dwellinghouses. This was because evidence indicated that, for the 1987 income year, individual contract costs could not be reliably estimated before completion. See Horizon Homes Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,064. Generally, the Commissioner will not accept a completed contract method, unless the contract allows payment only on the completion of the project. Where progressive payments are made, the general principles of the HW Coyle case (above) will be applied in determining assessable income for each year. The Commissioner will also apply a cash receipts basis. Where instalments are paid based on physical completion stages, then that is when revenue will be recognised. It is also possible that a long-term construction contract will be a financial arrangement for the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. Retention money  On 26 September 2013, Inland Revenue (IR) issued “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 13/04: “Income tax — retention money” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 10, November 2013 at 33). The item applies generally to business taxpayers for whom the payment, or the receipt, of retention money is on revenue account. The item applies to contracts generally and not only construction contracts. IR was asked when a contractor derives as income the retention money withheld by a customer and also incurs the expenditure of the retention money the contractor withholds from payments to the subcontractor. Retention money is generally a set percentage of a progress payment (say 10%) withheld as security for the contractor delivering the work free of defects or omissions. IR states that the contractor derives the retention money as income in the income year in which the works are complete and free of defects and omissions (that is any repairs are completed and omissions rectified) and thus when the income-earning process is completed and an enforceable debt is created. If payment is not to be made unless the work is certified by a third party, for example, by an engineer, the retention money is derived as income when that certificate is given. The same principle applies to derivation of income by the subcontractor. The contractor also incurs the expenditure of the retention money payment to the subcontractor in the income year in which all repairs are completed and omissions rectified, because that is when the contractor becomes definitively committed to make the payment. It is this that determines when the expense is incurred and not the due date for the payment. If the repairs and rectifications must be certified by a third party, for example, by an engineer, the contractor incurs the expenditure when that certificate is given as that is when the contractor becomes definitively committed to make the payment.  RELATED TOPICS ¶7-400 Trustee distribution of land to beneficiary  A distribution by a trustee to a beneficiary of land that is subject to the land disposal provisions is treated as a disposal of the land at its then market value, if another provision in the Income Tax Act 2007 does not already provide a value for the property. This may require the trustee to recognise income upon the distribution. The beneficiary is treated as having a cost of acquisition that is the same as the trustee’s disposal value. That would provide a cost base for the beneficiary, in the event that the beneficiary holds the land on revenue account. The same rules apply upon a resettlement of land that is subject to the land disposal provisions on another trust. Effectively, there is a disposal and acquisition of the land at its then market value. Law: IT07 ss FC 1–FC 5  ¶7-405 Death of a person who owned land The death of a person who owned land at the time of death that is subject to the land disposal provisions will give rise to two disposals. These are: ▪ the vesting of the land in the administrator or executor of the deceased’s estate (s FC 1(1)(a)), and ▪ a distribution by the administrator or executor to a beneficiary of the estate, whether under the will or upon an intestacy (s FC 1(1)(b)). Provision is made for rollover relief to be applied to the disposal, which means that the land will pass to the recipient and the disposal will be treated, in certain circumstances, in the same manner as a relationship property transfer taking place at tax book value (see ¶7440). That treatment applies to the following two categories of disposal: ▪ the vesting of the land in the executor and its later distribution to an estate beneficiary where:  □ the land is to pass to the surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner, and □ estate beneficiaries who are close relatives are to receive all estate assets comprising tax-base property which is defined as revenue account property, foreign investment fund interests, financial arrangements not accounted for on a cash basis and depreciable property. A close relative in this context is defined as a surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner, and a person who is within the second degree of relationship to the deceased (eg grandparents, grandchildren, brothers or sisters) ▪ distribution of the land by the executor to a beneficiary who is a close relative or a charity, either of whom is to receive all estate assets comprising tax-base property as above and where all of the following apply: □ the estate creates no life interest over the property □ no trust is created for the estate, apart from during the period of its administration, and □ during administration, the estate’s net income is distributed to the maximum extent possible. Note that s FC 9 overrides the above treatment for certain transfers of residential land, discussed below. The Commissioner has indicated that this second category can continue to apply if the will provides for legacies of assets that are not within the tax base. Possibly, the Commissioner had in mind legacies, such as jewellery and motor vehicles. Less certain is the position in relation to a cash legacy granted to a friend of the deceased. The focus of the second category is on the beneficiaries who are to receive the deceased’s revenue account assets. Since a cash legacy does not deal with taxable assets, it may be that such a provision does not prevent application of the second category. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 7, September 2005 at 43.  If the book value approach is not available, a market value treatment applies. The treatment becomes as follows: ▪ the executor is treated as having acquired land, subject to the land disposal provisions immediately before the death of the deceased at its then market value ▪ a beneficiary of the estate to whom the land is distributed is treated as acquiring the land at the same market value. Ten-year rules The effect of a person’s death on the 10-year rules incorporated in the land disposal provisions is addressed in s FC 5. The first topic dealt with is the categories of land disposal income relating to the disposal within 10 years of a dealer’s other land (¶7-065), a developer’s other land (¶7-085) and a builder’s other land (¶7-095). If an interest in land potentially subject to those provisions is to vest in a beneficiary who is a close relative of the deceased, they do not operate to create income upon: ▪ vesting of the land in the executor, and ▪ distribution to the beneficiary. A similar approach is provided for in relation to land affected by zoning change and disposed of within 10 years of acquisition (¶7135). That category of land disposal income does not operate to create income upon the land vesting in the executor, or when the executor distributes the land to an estate beneficiary. This is provided that a beneficiary who is a close relative receives an interest in the land. “Close relative” is defined in s FC 1(2) to mean a surviving spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner of the deceased person. It also includes any person who is within the second degree of relationship to the deceased person. In the event that any of the 10-year provisions are not prevented from having application, there is an attribution of costs. The executor or beneficiary is imputed with the cost of purchase by the deceased  and any further costs incurred by the deceased that have not already been allowed as a deduction. Expenditure incurred by the executor or administrator on land can also be included as part of the cost of the land when calculating profits on disposal. The executor or beneficiary may take those costs into account in determining the income arising under the land disposal provisions relating to other land and rezoning gains. Note that the concessions do not apply to land of the deceased that is subject to the rule for developments or divisions begun within 10 years. Bright-line test — transfers of residential land With effect for land acquired on or after 1 October 2015, the effect of a person’s death on the bright-line test in s CB 6A (see ¶7-050) is addressed in s FC 9. Rollover relief is provided for all transfers following a death and an exemption for any disposals by the executor or administrator or subsequent disposals by the beneficiaries. The rollover relief is achieved by deeming the transfers from the deceased person to the executor or administrator, and from the executor or administrator to the beneficiary, as a disposal and acquisition of the property to be at the total cost of the land to the deceased person at the date of transfer (rather than at the land’s market value). The effect of this is that no tax liabilities under the bright-line test arise under the transfers. Disposals by a beneficiary, executor or administrator of residential land transferred to them on the death of a person are specifically excluded from the bright-line test under s CB 6A(5). However, the disposals may still be subject to tax under the current land sale rules. Example: Inheritance  (Note that as the land was acquired before 29 March 2018, the bright-line period is two years. For land acquired on or after 29 March 2018, the bright-line period is five years.) Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 86.  Law: IT07 ss CB 6A(5), FC 1–FC 5, FC 9  ¶7-410 In specie distribution of land Land subject to the land disposal provisions that is distributed by a company to a shareholder may result in dividends (¶16-550). In that event, the land is treated as having been disposed of by the company for its market value and acquired by the recipient for market value on the date of the distribution. The shareholder derives dividends to the extent that that results in a transfer of company value to the shareholder. Law: IT07 ss FC 1(1)(d), FC 2(1)  ¶7-420 Gifts of land subject to land disposal provisions A gift may be made of land that is subject to the land disposal provisions. In that event, the donor is treated as having disposed of the land for its market value on the date on which the gift is effective. The recipient is treated as having an acquisition cost that is the same as that value.  Under the general law, a gift of land committed to a development scheme by a donor may be regarded as a gift of a capital asset that does not lead to assessable income upon the subsequent sale of the land by the donee. See Gutwenger v FC of T 95 ATC 4008. Law: IT07 ss FC 1(1)(e), FC 2(1)  ¶7-430 Associated persons and “tainting” and land disposal provisions The associated persons concept applies in connection with those who are in the business of dealing in land, developing land or erecting buildings. Where the person who disposes of the land, or someone associated with that person, carried on one of those kinds of business at the time of acquisition of the land (or at the time improvements were commenced for builders), the disposal gives rise to income under the provisions relating to: ▪ land acquired for the purposes of dealing, developing or building businesses (¶7-055), and ▪ the other land of a dealer (¶7-065), developer (¶7-085) or builder (¶7-095) where the land is sold within 10 years of acquisition (or within 10 years of completing improvements for builders). A definition of “associated persons” for the purposes of the land transaction provisions applies to land acquired, or land on which improvements were commenced, on or after 6 October 2009.  ¶7-432 Transfer of land between associated persons Land that is transferred between associated persons, and later sold by the transferee, gives rise to income in the hands of the transferee where: ▪ the transferee derives a gain upon on-sale of the land, and ▪ the amount derived would have been income of the transferor under any of ss CB 6–CB 14 if the transferor had retained and  disposed of the land. This does not apply to Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities (previously Housing New Zealand) or a company in the same wholly owned group: see ss CB 15(1B) and CB 15D and ¶7-210. Under s CB 15(2) an associated transferee is treated as having acquired land on the date on which the land was first acquired by an associated transferor. This treatment applies for the purposes of ss CB 7–CB 12 and CB 14. Adoption of the associated transferor’s acquisition date may have a favourable outcome in some cases. For example, the land disposal provisions relating to a development or division commenced within 10 years of acquisition did not apply where the land was acquired from a majority shareholder, an associated person, who had acquired it more than 10 years before commencement of development of the land by the company. See Paul Stephens Construction Ltd v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,192. In Case Z22 (2010) 24 NZTC 14,305 land held on revenue account by a development company was transferred to an unassociated (but closely connected) family trust. The sale price was minimal due to the fact that there was a 10-year lease in place between the development company and another associated company at the time. When the family trust later sold the property, the Commissioner assessed the sale proceeds on the grounds of tax avoidance. The Commissioner alleged that the sale of the property to the family trust was part of a tax avoidance arrangement to convert land held on revenue account by a development company to a capital asset of a connected family trust. In deciding in favour of the taxpayer, Judge Barber held that the character of property held by one party is not necessarily the same as its character in the hands of another. There was nothing artificial or contrived about the steps taken by the development company. Subsections (1) and (2) of s CB 15 apply in different circumstances for a disposal of land and are not interdependent. The different circumstances are:  ▪ a disposal of land that was acquired at an earlier time from an associated person of the vendor who would have been taxed on the disposal had the associated person retained the land and made the disposal themselves: s CB 15(1) ▪ a disposal of land that would be taxed under one of the land sales rules if the land is sold within 10 years of acquisition (or, in the case of the land sales rule applying to builders, sold within 10 years of commencing making improvements to the land): s CB 15(2). Section CB 15(1) is an anti-avoidance rule. Under that subsection, the income derived on disposal is income of the vendor under the anti-avoidance rule, rather than under any of the main land sales rules. This ensures that the anti-avoidance rule does not apply where there is a series of transactions between associated persons, and also clarifies that the vendor cannot use any of the exclusions from the main land sale rules. Section CB 15(2) ensures that the vendor is not taxed on the disposal of land if there is a combined period of actual ownership exceeding 10 years between: ▪ the vendor, and ▪ in certain circumstances, an associated person from whom they acquired the land. Note that s CB 15 was amended retrospectively from the beginning of the 2008–09 income year, but that a savings provision protected tax positions taken on the basis of the existing law before introduction of the relevant Bill on 28 June 2018. Law: IT07 s CB 15  ¶7-433 Basic categories of association The 12 categories of association are as follows: Two companies — s YB 2  Two companies are associated with each other when a group of persons together own at least 50% of the voting interests (or market value interests of at least 50% where a “market value circumstance” applies to either company) in each company or who control both companies by any other means. The test also includes an aggregation rule under which a person will be treated as holding anything held by an associated person, see s YB 2(4) and YB 2(5). The aggregation rule is intended to prevent the two companies test being circumvented by the fragmentation of interests among associated persons, so that the 50% threshold is not reached. There is an exception which provides that two companies are not associated where one of the companies is a portfolio investment entity (PIE). Example 1: Mrs X owns 100% of the shares in Co A. Mr X owns 100% of the shares in Co B.  The two companies are associated under s YB 2. This is because under the aggregation rule, Mrs X is deemed to hold the shares in Co B because she is associated with Mr X. Likewise, Mr X is deemed to hold the shares in Co A because he is associated with Mrs X. As a result, there is a group of persons who together own at least 50% of the voting interests in each company, making the two companies associated.  A company and a person other than a company — s YB 3 A company and a person other than a company (typically an individual) will be associated if the person owns at least 25% of the voting interests (or a market value interest of at least 25% where a “market value circumstance” applies). Before 29 March 2018, a “person other than a company” in this context included a corporate  trustee. There is also an aggregation rule similar to that applying to the previous test which provides that a person will be treated as holding anything held by an associated person. Example 2: Mr Z owns 100% of the shares in Co A. Mrs Z does not own any of the shares.  Mrs Z is associated with Co A even if she does not own any of the shares in Co A. This is because under the aggregation rule, Mrs Z is deemed to hold the shares held by Mr Z in Co A. Therefore, since she is deemed to hold at least 25% of the shares in Co A, she is associated with Co A.  Two relatives — s YB 4 There are three categories of association which apply to relatives. For land transactions two people will only be associated if they are married or in a civil union or de facto relationship. In addition, s YB 4(2) provides that for the purpose of the land provisions, persons are associated because of a blood relationship only if one is the infant child of the other (a child by adoption being treated as a natural child). An interesting exception to this section provides that two people are not associated if one person cannot reasonably be expected to know that the other person exists or the person is related within two degrees of blood relationship, see YB 4(4). Person and trustee for a relative — s YB 5 Section YB 5(2) expressly states that this test does not apply to land transactions.  Trustee and beneficiary — s YB 6 Section YB 6(2) expressly states that this test does not apply to land transactions. Two trustees with common settlor — s YB 7 A trustee of a trust and a trustee of another trust are associated persons if the same person is a settlor of both trusts. For the purposes of applying the test, persons who are married, or in a civil union or de facto relationship are treated as the same person, eg if a husband is the settlor of a trust and a wife is a settlor of another trust, the trusts will be associated as the husband and wife are treated as a common single settlor. The definition of a “settlor” for the purposes of the associated persons rules is widely drawn to include a person who transfers value to a trust, but it does not include a person who provides services to a trust for less than market value. Trustee and settlor — s YB 8 A trustee of a trust and the settlor of a trust are associated persons. This test, however, does not apply to charitable trusts, the effect of which prevents donors to charitable trusts from being associated with each other. Settlor and beneficiary — s YB 9 Section YB 9(2) states that this test does not apply to land transactions. Trustee and person with power of appointment and removal — s YB 11 A trustee of a trust and a person who has a power of appointment and removal of the trustee are associated persons. An exclusion exists for a person who holds the power of appointment or removal of that trustee in their professional capacity if the person meets all of the following criteria: ▪ the person holds the power as a provider of professional services  ▪ the person is subject to a professional code of conduct, and disciplinary process intended to enforce compliance with the code, of an approved organisation as that term is defined in s 3(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994, for such providers of professional services, and ▪ the person has not benefited from the trust and is not eligible to benefit from the trust. Approved organisations include Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand, the New Zealand Law Society, and the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners. Partnership and partner — s YB 12 A partnership and a partner in the partnership will be associated under this test. A separate rule applies to partners in limited partnership. Look-through company and a person — s YB 13 A person is associated with a look-through company if that person holds a look-through interest in the company and is also a director or employee of the company under s YB 13(1). If s YB 13(1) does not apply, then a person is associated with a look-through company if that person has an effective look-through interest of 25% or more in the company. Aggregation rules, similar to those applying under the association test for two companies, also apply. Example 3: Elberfeld Developments Ltd is a look-through company that carries on business as a property developer. The shareholders of Elberfeld Developments Ltd are Baron Elberfeld (60%), Max Detweiler (20%) and Rolf (20%). The directors of Elberfeld Developments Ltd are Baron Elberfeld and Max Detweiler. Rolf is not a director of Elberfeld Developments Ltd, but he is employed by the company to make deliveries. Are Baron Elberfeld, Max Detweiler and Rolf associated with Elberfeld Developments Ltd? Baron Elberfeld, Max Detweiler and Rolf will all be associated with Elberfeld Developments Ltd. In particular, Baron Elberfeld and Max Detweiler will be associated with Elberfeld Developments Ltd, as they both hold look-through interests in the company and are directors of the company. Rolf will be associated with Elberfeld  Developments Ltd, as he holds a look-through interest in the company and is an employee of the company. Note that Max Detweiler and Rolf will be associated with Elberfeld Developments Ltd even though they each hold less than 25% of the shares in the company. Under the aggregation rule, any person who is associated with Baron Elberfeld, Max Detweiler or Rolf under the other tests of association will be treated as holding their look-through interests in Elberfeld Developments Ltd. Note, however, that any such associated person will not be imputed with Baron Elberfeld’s, Max Detweiler’s or Rolf’s status as a director or shareholder of the company. Accordingly, persons associated with Max Detweiler or Rolf will not necessarily be associated with Elberfeld Developments Ltd under s YB 13. Such persons may, however, be associated with Elberfeld Developments Ltd under the tripartite test of association in s YB 14.  Tripartite relationship — s YB 14 Two persons will be associated where they are each associated with the same third person. However, the test will only apply where each is associated with the same third person under a different test of association. In addition, an exception exists where the corporate tests of association apply, such that the test will not apply where the first person is associated with the third person under s YB 2 and the third person is associated with the second person under s YB 3. Example 4: Mr T owns 100% of the shares in Co A. Mr T also has a family trust of which he is the settlor.  The trust and Co A will be associated under the tripartite test. This is because they are both associated with a common third person, being Mr T. Co A is associated with Mr T under s YB 3 because at least 25% of the shares in Co A are owned by Mr T. The trust is associated with Mr T under s YB 8 because Mr T is the settlor of the trust. Therefore, Co A and the trust are associated under the tripartite test.  Law: IT07 ss HC 27, YB 1–YB 16  ¶7-435 Nominees Any rights held or exercised by a nominee for another person are treated as if the person has held or exercised the rights and the nominee is ignored. A trustee is only a nominee if acting in the capacity of a bare trustee. Example: Agri-Co-One Ltd has three shareholders: Hewey, Dewey and Louie. The voting interest held in Agri-Co-One Ltd by each shareholder is 60%, 20% and 20% respectively. Agri-Co-Two Ltd has four shareholders: April, May, June and Hewey. The voting interest held in Agri-Co-Two Ltd by each shareholder is 30%, 20%, 15% and 35% respectively. June holds her shares in Agri-Co-Two Ltd as nominee for Hewey. Are Agri-Co-One Ltd and Agri-Co-Two Ltd associated persons? Yes, Agri-Co-One Ltd and Agri-Co-Two Ltd are associated persons. This is because, in determining the voting interest held by each person in each company, the 15% voting interest held by June (the nominee) in Agri-Co-Two Ltd is attributed to Hewey (the other person). Therefore, Hewey holds a voting interest in Agri-Co-Two Ltd of 50%. The associated persons test is satisfied because Hewey has a voting interest in each company equal to 50% or more, see s YB 2.  Law: IT07 s YB 21  ¶7-440 Relationship property transfer of land A settlement of relationship property is defined in s FB 1B to mean a transaction between parties to a relationship agreement that creates a disposal and acquisition of property under subpart FB. Section FB 3 applies (for the purposes of ss CB 6–CB 12, CB 14, CB 17, CB 20, CB 23) when land is acquired under the conditions set out in any of those provisions and the land is transferred on a settlement of relationship property. Section FB 3 stipulates that: ▪ the transferor is treated as having disposed of the land for its cost price  ▪ the transferee is treated as having acquired the land for that cost price, and ▪ the transferee is regarded as having acquired the land on the day the transferor acquired it. A disposal under the above provisions includes a sale by a mortgagee where the transferee defaults under the mortgage. See s FB 5. For the purposes of s CB 13, land that is in the course of a major development or division is treated as disposed of and acquired at a cost equivalent to market value of the land at the commencement of the scheme together with the transferor’s accumulated costs. See s FB 4. Example 1: In 2016, Mr TP acquired a block of land for $100,000, and he spent $20,000 in subdividing it. In 2017, the land was transferred to Mrs TP, pursuant to a settlement of relationship property. Mrs TP continued with the subdivision at a cost of $70,000, and the land was sold for $270,000. No tax liability arose in the hands of Mr TP, because the deemed sale price equalled the cost price plus capitalised expenses. The tax liability of Mrs TP would be calculated as follows: $ Proceeds of sale Less  270,000 Cost price  100,000  Capitalised expenses  20,000  Further subdivision costs  70,000 190,000  Taxable income  190,000 80,000  The effect of these provisions is that the land is treated as having been transferred under the settlement of relationship property for its book value. As a consequence, no income will arise to the transferor.  If the transferee later sells the land, any gain on sale is income in the hands of that person. Bright-line test — residential land With effect for land acquired on or after 1 October 2015, s FB 3A applies a similar provision for the purposes of the bright-line test in s CB 6A (see ¶7-050) and, from 23 March 2020, the main home exclusion for the bright-line test in s CB 16A (see ¶7-215) where residential land is transferred on a settlement of relationship property. No tax liability arises under the bright-line test for the transfer of the property under the relationship property agreement. The transfer is treated as a disposal and acquisition for the total cost of the land to the transferor at the date of transfer. The transferee is treated as having acquired the residential land on the date the transferor acquired it. However, the person to whom the relationship property has been transferred may be liable under the bright-line test for any subsequent disposal of the property. Example 2:  (Note that as the land was acquired before 29 March 2018, the bright-line period is two years. For land acquired on or after 29 March 2018, the bright-line period is five years.) Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 86.  Law: IT07 ss FB 3A–FB 5  ¶7-450 Land affected by Canterbury and Hurunui/Kaikoura earthquakes A number of provisions have been introduced to provide relief to those taxpayers who hold land and buildings as revenue account property that have been affected by the Canterbury and Kaikoura earthquakes. Canterbury earthquakes Rollover relief under s CZ 25 may be available to a person whose land and buildings held on revenue account have been damaged by the Canterbury earthquakes. To take advantage of rollover relief the following must apply to the person before the 2024–25 income year: ▪ the person receives: □ an insurance or compensation payment in relation to revenue account land or buildings damaged by a Canterbury earthquake, and the damage causes the building to be useless for the purpose of deriving assessable income and is to be demolished or abandoned for later demolition, or □ a payment from the Crown for the purchase of revenue account land or buildings under the Government’s “red zone compensation package”, and ▪ the person would have received an amount of income, under s CB 6, CB 7, CB 12, CB 13 or CG 6, from the consideration, insurance or compensation for the affected property that exceeds the total amount of available deductions under ss DB 23 and DB 27 for the affected property, and ▪ the person plans to acquire revenue account land or buildings to replace the affected property, and the property is acquired before the 2024–25 income year and is located in greater Christchurch, and ▪ the person notifies the Commissioner.  When the above requirements are met, the person may effectively defer the income (suspended recovery income) that would otherwise arise pursuant to s CB 6, CB 7, CB 12, CB 13 or CG 6. Any suspended recovery income remaining becomes assessable income at the end of the 2023–24 income year. Assessable income also arises if a balance of suspended recovery income remains in an income year in which the person decides not to acquire replacement property or becomes bankrupt or goes into liquidation. A further provision (s CZ 26) provides that assessable income under ss CB 9–CB 12 and CB 14 does not arise where land is purchased by the Crown under s 91, s 103 or 104 of the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016 (before 19 April 2016, s 53(1), 54 or 55 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011). This provision is intended to provide some relief for taxpayers whose land is purchased by the Government under the “red zone compensation package”. Section CZ 26 applies from 4 September 2010. However, with effect from 27 February 2014, the section no longer applies to assessable income under s CB 12. Hurunui/Kaikoura earthquake Section CZ 25B allows the owners of revenue account property that is land and buildings affected by the Hurunui/Kaikoura earthquake in November 2016 the same rollover treatment as set out above for the owners of property affected by the Canterbury earthquakes in 2010– 2011. The provision applies for income years before the 2024–25 income year. Law: IT07 ss CZ 25, CZ 25B, CZ 26  ¶7-500 Property investment income A common use of land is to earn investment income in the form of rents. Generally, all receipts received are income and all expenses are allowed as a deduction. Any improvements made by a tenant are not taxable to the lessor as rent, nor are they deductible to the tenant.  In more detail, income from land encompasses all rents, fines, premiums or other revenue (including goodwill) derived by the owner of land from any lease, licence or other easement or the granting of rights to take profits from the land. An income-spreading provision for this type of income is described at ¶5-115. Where a property is purchased for resale any profit from rental income will be taxable. Expenses such as insurance, rates or repairs and maintenance, pending sale are deductible from the gross rental amount. Expenses applicable to the property should still be deductible even in the event that the property is temporarily vacant. Law: IT07 s CC 1  ¶7-521 Structuring borrowings for rental accommodation It is important for persons seeking to deduct interest costs on rental property to structure their borrowings carefully. Interest is deductible providing the property is used for deriving rental income and the objective of achieving a capital gain on sale does not prevent that result (¶10-650). There have been a number of tax cases on this point. See Case R8 (1994) 16 NZTC 6,049, Case S17 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,127, Case S87 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,545 and Case T16 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,095. Example: A owns his residence debt free. A wins a major prize in Lotto and plans to use the proceeds towards both upgrading his home and buying a rental property. From a tax perspective, he would be better advised to use the cash to improve his residence and borrow to buy the rental property.  Where a person has a debt-free rental property and wishes to acquire another property for personal use, commentators suggest that a possible alternative is for the rental property to be purchased by another entity, for example, a family trust. The resulting sale proceeds could then be used to purchase the private residence. If the trust or other entity borrows funds to purchase the rental  property, the interest deductibility test will be met since borrowed funds will have been used to acquire an income-producing asset. Note that the general anti-avoidance provisions will need to be considered in any such transaction. On 10 April 2012 the Commissioner issued public binding ruling BR Pub 12/03, “Deductibility of break fee paid by a landlord to exit early from a fixed interest rate loan on sale of rental property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 4). The Commissioner states the repayment of the loan will trigger a base price adjustment under the financial arrangements rules. The amount of the break fee is included as part of the “consideration” in the base price adjustment formula. A negative base price adjustment is deemed to be interest expenditure. Companies may be entitled to an automatic deduction under s DB 7 of the Income Tax Act 2007. For those taxpayers who do not qualify for an automatic deduction, a deduction will be permitted under ss DB 6 and DA 1 (the general permission). See further at ¶10-190.  ¶7-522 GST and rental accommodation The letting out of a residential property is an exempt supply for GST purposes. See ¶32-052. Consequently, no GST may be charged on the rent, or claimed on the purchase price of the dwelling or the ongoing rental costs (such as repairs and maintenance). Property supplied by lease that is to be used for the principal purpose of residential accommodation is also exempt from GST. The exemption for residential accommodation does not extend to homestays, farmstays, bed-and-breakfast establishments and serviced apartments as these types of accommodation are included the definition of “commercial dwelling”. The GST issues on renting dwellings change when a person buys a house for development and rents the house out as an interim measure. In this case, the GST input tax can be claimed on the purchase (including by way of a secondhand goods credit if the vendor is not GST-registered). However, adjustments will be required  where the house is used concurrently for a taxable and non-taxable purpose. See ¶32-088.  ¶7-530 GST on land transactions For full discussion of GST in relation to land transactions, including: ▪ time of supply ▪ long-term settlement ▪ zero-rating rules ▪ invoices, payment and real property transactions ▪ transactions between associated persons ▪ mortgagee sales, going concerns ▪ recovery of GST — sale and purchase agreement ▪ GST and local authority rates, please refer to ¶32-500–¶32-590.  STUDENT LOANS Overview of the student loan scheme  ¶8-010  What’s in a student loan?  ¶8-015  Eligibility for a student loan  ¶8-020  How long can you get a student loan for?  ¶8-022  New Zealand-based borrowers under student loan scheme  ¶8-025  Overseas based-borrowers under student loan scheme  ¶8-030  Interest liability on a student loan  ¶8-035  Student loan repayment obligations of New Zealandbased borrowers  ¶8-040  Student loan repayment obligations of overseasbased borrowers  ¶8-045  Temporary repayment suspension for student loan borrower going overseas  ¶8-050  Employers’ obligations regarding student loans  ¶8-055  Exemption from repayment of student loan for fulltime students  ¶8-060  Over- and under-deductions from student borrower’s income  ¶8-065  Refunds of excess repayments of student loan  ¶8-070  Interim loan repayments of student loan  ¶8-085  Cancellation of interest if consolidated student loan balance repaid early  ¶8-090  Information sharing between Inland Revenue and Customs regarding student loans  ¶8-095  Information sharing between Inland Revenue and Australian Taxation Office regarding student loans  ¶8-097  Late payment interest and relief on student loans  ¶8-100  Shortfall penalties and student loans  ¶8-105  Criminal offences under the Student Loan Scheme Act  ¶8-110  Transfer of information between loan manager, Inland Revenue and student loan borrower ¶8-115 Student loan borrowers may object to details of loan advances  ¶8-120  Challenges after transfer of student loan balance to Commissioner  ¶8-125  Schedule 1 Exemptions  ¶8-130  ¶8-010 Overview of the student loan scheme Development of Legislation The Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (SLSA 2011) replaced the Student Loan Scheme Act 1992 with effect from 1 April 2012. The SLSA 2011 rewrote the legislation governing the administration of student loans and reformed the way borrowers manage and repay their loans. The changes also allowed borrowers to access and manage their loans electronically. The SLSA 2011 has undergone further amendment most years since then. General overview of the student loan scheme The student loan scheme provides for the payment of compulsory fees, course-related costs and living costs. See ¶8-015. A student will be eligible for a student loan if he or she is a New Zealand citizen, a permanent resident, or a refugee and enrolled in a  Tertiary Education Commission approved course. See ¶8-020. Whether a borrower is based in New Zealand or overseas will determine the type of repayment obligations that apply. See ¶8-025 and ¶8-030. Student loan repayment obligations are determined by the type of the borrower’s income. Methods for repayment differ according to whether the borrower earns a salary or wages, pre-taxed income (eg dividends or interest) and/or other income (eg rental income). Loan repayments for salary and wages earners are deducted by the employer based on the pay period repayment threshold and paid to Inland Revenue (IR) on behalf of the borrower. A deduction will only be required where income exceeds the repayment threshold of $20,020 pa ($20,280 pa from 1 April 2021). See further at ¶8-040. Generally, unless there is a significant over- or under-deduction, the borrower’s repayment deductions are considered final. Consequently, there is usually no need for an annual assessment. If there is a significant under-deduction, IR may require the employer to make “catch-up” deductions from the borrower’s future salary or wages to recover the unpaid amount. For significant overdeductions, the borrower can either request a refund or have this applied to their loan balance. See ¶8-065. If the borrower has income from other sources such as interest, dividends, rental or business income, they may be required to have an annual end-of-year assessment. Where a borrower derives income from secondary employment, they may apply to transfer any unused repayment threshold from their primary employment to their secondary employment. Those borrowers who are full-time students and earn less than the annual repayment threshold can apply to be exempt from having repayment deductions made from their salary or wages. These borrowers are not required to file an income tax return. See ¶8-060. The New Zealand Customs Service and IR can exchange information as part of an information matching programme. This  programme assists the Commissioner in verifying whether borrowers are based overseas or in New Zealand. See further at ¶8-095. Late payment interest will be charged where a borrower has failed to pay an amount by the due date. Refer to ¶8-100. Where a borrower adopts an incorrect tax position, he or she will be liable for a shortfall penalty. Shortfall penalties are imposed at the same rate as for taking an incorrect tax position. If a borrower wilfully or negligently fails to provide information to IR, penalties for criminal offences may apply. See further at ¶8-110. IR was previously required to maintain the student loan scheme rules back to 1992, when the scheme was introduced, in case either the Commissioner or the borrower sought to review a borrower’s repayment obligation. As changes have been made to the scheme in 21 of the last 26 years, this meant the compliance cost for borrowers, administration costs for IR and the complexity of the scheme over time have all increased. As part of IR’s Business Transformation programme, a simplified set of rules was introduced in March 2020 to apply for the period from 1992 to 1 April 2013. For tax years before 1 April 2013, a borrower’s repayment obligation is only able to be reopened where a borrower: ▪ has been incorrectly treated as either New Zealand based or overseas based ▪ has committed fraud ▪ has not provided information and it is cost effective for the Commissioner to reopen the obligation, or ▪ would be adversely affected if reopening did not occur. The 1 April 2013 date was chosen as nearly all adjustments to borrowers’ repayment obligations have occurred within this timeframe and the rules applying from that date onwards are largely the same as applies at present.  ¶8-015 What’s in a student loan?  The student loan scheme provides for the payment of: ▪ compulsory fees — the compulsory fees for the course of study that are paid by students at enrolment (except for charges such as penalty fees for late enrolment or administration charges for paying by instalments) ▪ course-related costs — a maximum amount of $1,000 a year for full-time full-year courses to assist with course-related costs such as equipment, textbooks, etc, and ▪ living costs after tax — a maximum amount of $239.76 per week of study (less any entitlement to student allowances). A new loan is required for each new course. A loan account usually runs for 52 weeks. An establishment fee (approximately $60) is added to the loan each time a new loan account is opened. An administration fee of $40 per year (where no establishment fee has been paid in the same year in respect of that loan) is also added to the loan.  ¶8-020 Eligibility for a student loan A student will be eligible for a student loan if they are either: ▪ a New Zealand citizen, or ▪ ordinarily resident in New Zealand and: □ they have been living in New Zealand for at least three years while holding a residence class visa, or □ they are a refugee or protected person (under the Immigration Act 2009), or □ they are sponsored into New Zealand by someone in their family who, at the time they were sponsored, was a refugee or protected person.  In addition, the student must be enrolled on a Tertiary Education Commission approved course. The course must be: ▪ full time (or limited full time with the Ministry of Social Development’s approval), or ▪ a part-time programme of at least 32 weeks (to get a loan for compulsory fees and course-related costs only), or ▪ part time, less than 32 weeks and at least 0.25 Equivalent FullTime Student (EFTS) (to get a student loan for compulsory fees only). A year of full-time study is usually between 0.8 EFTS and 1.2 EFTS. Not able to obtain a student loan? There are some situations where students will not be able to obtain either all or part of a student loan. These include: ▪ Students who are under 18 years cannot get a student loan if they are either studying a fees-free level 1 or 2 qualification or studying a Youth Guarantee programme. Students over 18 in these circumstances can get a loan for course-related costs and living costs. ▪ Where the student is an undischarged bankrupt, the student is ineligible for any student loan. ▪ Where the student is $500 or more in default (including all repayment obligations, late payment interest, penalties, and amounts under instalment arrangements) with Inland Revenue and if some or all of this amount has been overdue for a year or more. ▪ Where a student or the student’s partner receives certain benefits from Work and Income New Zealand, the student will be eligible for a loan for compulsory fees and course-related costs only, ie no loan available for living costs.  ▪ Students who are 55 or over will only be eligible for a loan for compulsory fees. ▪ Students in prison are eligible for a loan for compulsory fees and course-related costs. ▪ Students wishing to reapply for a student loan for subsequent years will need to pass at least half of all the EFTS of all previous study to be eligible.  ¶8-022 How long can you get a student loan for? A new loan is required for each new course. A loan account usually runs for 52 weeks. There is a lifetime limit of seven Equivalent Full-Time Students (EFTS) for student loans. The lifetime limit includes all study for which a borrower has had a student loan since 1 January 2010. Full-time students usually have study loads of between 0.8 EFTS and 1.2 EFTS per a year. For a full-time student, seven EFTS is equal to about seven or eight years of study. Part-time students use less EFTS each year. Once any part of the student loan is used for living costs, fees or course-related costs, the EFTS for that loan will count towards the seven EFTS limit. There are some situations where a student can use more than seven EFTS, such as for post-graduate study; however, most students will not be able to receive more than 10 EFTS of student loan entitlements.  ¶8-025 New Zealand-based borrowers under student loan scheme Different repayment obligations apply to borrowers depending on whether they are based in New Zealand or overseas (see ¶8-040  and ¶8-045). A borrower will be treated as New Zealand based where they are physically in New Zealand (or treated as being physically in New Zealand) for a period of 183 consecutive days. If a borrower leaves the country during the 183-day period they will remain New Zealand based provided they are not absent for more than a total of 31 days and they are physically present on the first day of that 183-day period. In accordance with s 22(2) a period of 183 consecutive days may include any days before the day on which a person becomes a borrower. Under s 22(3) a borrower is treated as being New Zealand based from the later of the day they became a borrower and the first day of the 183-day period. Borrowers treated as being physically in New Zealand A borrower may be treated as being physically present in New Zealand if the Commissioner considers it is fair and reasonable to do so because: (a) the borrower is in the service of the New Zealand Government (b) the borrower is working as a volunteer or for token payment for a charity (c) of an unexpected delay (d) of an unplanned personal absence (e) the borrower is required to be overseas because of the borrower’s employment or occupation (f) the borrower is accompanying his or her spouse, civil union or de facto partner overseas (g) the borrower is undertaking overseas study or an internship that meets the criteria of cl 7, 8, 9, 9A or 9B of sch 1 of the  Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (SLSA 2011), or (h) the borrower is in Niue, the Cook Islands, Tokelau or the Ross Dependency. The specific criteria that must be satisfied under each of the reasons listed in subsections (b)–(h) above are set out in detail in sch 1 of the SLSA 2011. See also ¶8-130–¶8-155. With effect from 1 April 2020, a borrower who has a serious illness, and is unable to meet their overseas-based repayment obligations as a result of that illness, is able to be treated as being physically present in New Zealand if the Commissioner considers that it is fair and reasonable to do so. For these purposes, a “serious illness” is defined as an injury, illness or disability that: ▪ results in the borrower being unable to engage in paid work (other than work for which the person is paid a token payment or a very low wage), or ▪ poses a serious and imminent risk of death. An overseas-based borrower who is physically in New Zealand must, as soon as practicable after becoming New Zealand based or aware they will be New Zealand based, notify the Commissioner of the date they returned to New Zealand and provide any information the Commissioner requires to determine whether the borrower should now be treated as New Zealand based. See s 29. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 21–29  ¶8-030 Overseas-based borrowers under student loan scheme A person will be overseas based if they are not treated as being New Zealand based. A New Zealand-based borrower who is physically absent, or treated as physically absent, from New Zealand for 184 days or more consecutively will be treated as an overseas borrower.  Where a borrower returns to New Zealand within the 184-day period they will remain overseas based providing they are not physically present in New Zealand for a period exceeding 31 days in total. The tie-breaker provision that was inadvertently omitted when the Student Loan Scheme Act was rewritten in 2011 was retrospectively reinstated in 2019. The provision ensures that a borrower cannot be treated as absent from New Zealand for the purposes of the 184-day test for any day on which they are treated as being physically present in New Zealand under s 22 (see ¶8-025). Thus, borrowers who return to New Zealand after being overseas for less than six months will not become overseas-based borrowers. It is important to note that under s 23(2) the 184-day period can begin before the person becomes a borrower. A borrower will be treated as being overseas based from the later of the day they became a borrower and the first day of the 184-day period. Impact of COVID-19 virus on 184-day count Inland Revenue has stated that a New Zealand-based borrower who is stranded overseas due to the COVID-19 pandemic will not become an overseas-based borrower provided the person returns to New Zealand within a reasonable time period after they are no longer restricted from travelling. Example Jill has a student loan, but she has been on an OE. She is stranded and will have been out of New Zealand for over 184 days when she is finally able to return to New Zealand. So long as Jill returns to New Zealand within a reasonable time from when she is no longer practically restricted from travelling, she will not be viewed as an overseas-based borrower. Therefore, she will not be charged interest, as she would be if she were an overseasbased borrower. Jill plans to return to New Zealand as soon as she is able. Example adapted from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 23 April 2020  Notice to IR of absences exceeding 183 days  Borrowers going overseas for more than six months must notify Inland Revenue of the following: ▪ One of the following ways for the Commissioner to notify the borrower: (i) a permanent overseas postal address (ii) a New Zealand postal address, or (iii) the name and New Zealand postal address of a person empowered to act for the borrower. ▪ An electronic means of communication prescribed by the Commissioner, most likely an email address. ▪ Any information the Commissioner requires to determine the borrower’s repayment and interest liability obligations. In accordance with s 28(2), a borrower who leaves without notifying the Commissioner must provide the same information listed above and the date of departure from New Zealand as soon as practicable after they become overseas based or aware they will be overseas based. There is also a requirement for a borrower to provide prompt notification to the Commissioner where there is a change of his or her contact details. See s 28(3) or 193C. For discussion on loan repayment obligations of overseas-based borrowers and temporary repayment suspensions, refer to ¶8-045 and ¶8-050. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 21–29  ¶8-035 Interest liability on a student loan Interest is only imposed on the loan balances of overseas-based borrowers.  Before 1 April 2020, the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 imposed interest on the loan balances of all borrowers and then provided a full interest write-off to borrowers for each day that they were New Zealand based. The effect of this was to impose interest only on the loan balances of borrowers who were overseas based. However, with the transition of student loans to Inland Revenue’s new computer system, START, from 1 April 2020, New Zealand-based borrowers no longer have to be charged interest and have it written off. Interest is calculated daily and charged and added to the loan balance on the last day of the tax year. The Commissioner is required to notify the borrower in writing of the amount of interest charged after interest is added to the borrower’s loan balance. The current interest rate is 3.5%. Example: Rose is an overseas-based borrower and not on a repayment holiday. Rose’s loan balance at 1 April 2017 is $15,000. Rose will be required to pay $1,000 in two instalments to meet her overseas-based repayment obligation. She pays the first amount on its due date (30 September), but pays the second amount early on 1 March (instead of its due date of 31 March). She also makes one voluntary repayment on 30 September. Date paid  Repayment  Amount  30 September 2017  Repayment obligation payment  $500  30 September 2017  Voluntary repayment  $400  1 March 2018  Repayment obligation payment  $500  Each time Rose makes a repayment a new daily interest calculation starts. Rose’s interest calculation from 1 April 2017 to 30 September 2017: ($15,000 × 4.4%) × (183/365) = $330.90 ▸ Note: For the purpose of calculating interest for the rest of the income year, the interest of $330.90 to 30 September is not added to Rose’s loan balance yet. If Rose checks her balance she will see this interest on her loan. Rose’s interest calculation from 1 October 2017 to 1 March 2018: (($15,000 − $900) × 4.4%) × (152/365) = $258.36.  ▸ Note: Rose’s loan balance for this daily interest calculation, is now $14,100 ($15,000 − $900). Rose’s interest calculation from 2 March 2018 to 31 March 2018: (($14,100 − $500) × 4.4%) × (30/365) = $49.18. ▸ Note: Rose’s loan balance for this daily interest calculation is now $13,600 ($14,100 − $500). Rose’s loan balance at the end of the tax year, including her daily interest, is $14,238.44. ($13,600 + $330.90 + $258.36 + $549.18). Compound interest Rose’s daily interest for the year is added to her loan balance annually. This means that the balance Inland Revenue charges interest on for the next tax year includes Rose’s previous year’s daily interest. In the example above, Rose’s new loan balance for calculating her daily interest, as at 1 April 2018, increases from $13,600 to $14,238.44. If Rose was a New Zealand-based borrower, her daily interest totalling $638.44 would be written off and her loan balance would not be increased by this amount.  Law: SLSA 2011 ss 133–138  ¶8-040 Student loan repayment obligations of New Zealand-based borrowers For salary and wage earners, loan repayments are deducted directly from their salary or wages. Deductions are only required when the borrower’s income exceeds the specified repayment threshold. Legislation was enacted to provide that student loan borrowers who received schedular, election-day and casual agricultural income would also have student loan repayments deducted from their income by their employer. However, this legislation was repealed before it ever came into effect as it was believed the compliance costs would be too high. Tax codes A borrower earning salary or wages in New Zealand must use tax codes that include the “SL” repayment code, ie the repayment code is combined with the employee tax code. There are two exemptions:  ▪ borrowers who are studying full time and working part time, or ▪ borrowers who are receiving an income-tested benefit. Notice required A borrower must notify their employer (including a secondary employer) of their student loan. The notice must be given as soon as practicable after the time at which the borrower becomes an employee, or the time at which the borrower takes out the loan, whichever is the later. The notice must inform the employer: ▪ that student loan repayment deductions must be made from the borrower’s salary or wages, and ▪ that the tax code prescribed under the PAYE rules should be followed by the repayment code “SL”. A borrower must notify their employer if their repayment code changes. Deduction rate When a borrower notifies their employer that student loan repayment deductions must be made, the employer or PAYE intermediary must deduct 12¢ from every dollar earned over the $20,020 pa threshold ($20,280 pa from 1 April 2021). This is then paid to Inland Revenue (IR) on the borrower’s behalf. Special deduction rate certificate Before 1 April 2019, a borrower who had income from more than one source in excess of the repayment threshold, or who earned more than the repayment threshold (before tax) from a number of jobs but not from any one job, or who wanted to pay off his or her loan faster, could apply for a special deduction rate certificate. With effect from 1 April 2019, special rate deduction certificates have been replaced by tailored tax codes and rates and they can no longer be used to adjust student loan repayment deductions. See IR 23G “Do you need a tailored tax code or tailored tax rate?” (November 2019). Income other than salary or wages  New Zealand-based borrowers, other than new borrowers, who derive more than $500 (before 1 April 2020, $1,500) in income other than from salary or wages will have additional repayment obligations. This is calculated by IR after receiving the borrower’s return of income, details of the borrower’s gross income and gross deductions, or a declaration from the borrower of their adjusted net income (which is their income other than from salary or wages). Losses from investments or business activities are ignored for these purposes. Section 73 and sch 3 of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 prescribe what is included when calculating adjusted net income. Note that sch 3 includes income from a variety of sources within a borrower’s net adjusted income, for example, income from certain fringe benefits, pensions and annuities, trusts, PIEs and superannuation schemes. Voluntary repayments A student can make voluntary repayments to IR at any time after the loan account has been handed over to IR by the student loan manager. Repayments must be clearly identified as student loan repayments and should have the student’s name and IRD number attached. IR has a repayment calculator available on its website at www.ird.govt.nz showing the effect on the amount of interest payable and the term of the loan if voluntary payments are made. Statement of account Borrowers can request a statement of account by contacting IR or by using IR’s website at www.ird.govt.nz. The statement of account shows the borrower’s current loan balance, the interest charged on the loan and any repayments made. Borrowers can also check their balances and whether they have any amount in default through IR’s online service, MyIR. See ¶8-115 for the disclosure of information rules. Returns and assessments The requirements for the furnishing and assessment of returns are the same as those of the Tax Administration Act 1994. If a borrower  is required to furnish an annual return, the Commissioner will make an assessment of the borrower’s repayment obligation for the year. The rules for challenging an assessment are the same as those set out in the Tax Administration Act 1994. See ¶4-010 et seq. Despite taxpayer self-assessment, the Commissioner continues to assess a borrower’s repayment obligation for the year. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 33–38, 73, sch 3; TAA s 24D  ¶8-045 Student loan repayment obligations of overseasbased borrowers Where an overseas-based borrower’s temporary repayment suspension (see ¶8-050) has ended or if the borrower has opted out of having a temporary repayment suspension, the repayment obligations apply. The annual repayment must be paid in two equal instalments on 30 September and 31 March; however, the Commissioner may determine different dates if the Commissioner considers it necessary and appropriate in the circumstances. If the total amount payable is not divisible into equal amounts, then the final payment carries the difference. See s 112. Overseas-based borrowers have fixed repayment obligations. Instead of an overseas borrower’s repayment obligation decreasing as their loan balance decreases, overseas borrowers have their repayment obligation maintained at the same rate as when they became overseas based. If a borrower’s loan balance increases so that it rises into a higher repayment threshold, the ongoing repayment obligation will be fixed at the new higher threshold. The repayment thresholds are as follows: Outstanding loan balance as at 31 March  Annual repayment due (payable in two equal instalments)  Under $1,000  The entire remaining balance  Outstanding loan balance as at 31 March  Annual repayment due (payable in two equal instalments)  Over $1,000 and up to $15,000  $1,000  Over $15,000 and up to $30,000 $2,000 Over $30,000 and up to $45,000 $3,000 Over $45,000 and up to $60,000 $4,000 Over $60,000  $5,000  If the borrower is not overseas based for the full tax year, a pro-rata repayment amount is calculated in accordance with the formula set out in s 110(3). In this case, the instalment dates will be determined by the Commissioner. A borrower may be liable to pay late payment interest (see ¶8-100) if they do not meet the repayment obligations under ss 110–113. It is also a criminal offence for borrowers who are in default of their overseas-based repayment obligations and who have been notified of this by Inland Revenue (IR), to knowingly fail or refuse to make reasonable efforts to pay or make arrangements to pay. IR is then able to apply for an arrest warrant to be issued for borrowers who have committed this offence and are about to leave or attempt to leave New Zealand. The court may make a variety of orders for repayment, including that the borrower not leave New Zealand without the court’s permission and that they must surrender their travel documents. Attempting to leave New Zealand when one of these orders is in effect is also a criminal offence. The provisions are designed to allow IR to stop overseas borrowers who are visiting New Zealand to leave without making reasonable efforts to pay or making arrangements to pay. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 31(1), 110–113, 162A, 162B  ¶8-050 Temporary repayment suspension for student loan borrower going overseas A borrower who intends going overseas can apply for a temporary repayment suspension (before 1 April 2020, a repayment holiday) of up to 365 days. A temporary repayment suspension means a period during which a borrower’s overseas-based repayment obligations are reduced to zero. A borrower who intends to be based overseas may apply to the Commissioner for a temporary repayment suspension. The application can be made from New Zealand or from overseas, but no application can be made by an overseas-based borrower, see s 107. Therefore, the application should be made with 183 days of leaving New Zealand. See ¶8-025. At the time of making the application the borrower must nominate a contact person who resides in New Zealand. The individual must be prepared to act as the borrower’s contact person and the following information about the individual must be provided to the Commissioner: ▪ name ▪ a New Zealand postal address and email address (if applicable) ▪ a New Zealand phone number ▪ any further information specified in the regulations. The Commissioner may grant a temporary repayment suspension to a borrower who has completed an acceptable application, provided a contact person (and the required details above) and not reached the borrower’s limit. Under s 107B a borrower who is granted a temporary repayment suspension becomes entitled to that repayment suspension on the day on which the borrower becomes overseas based.  A borrower reaches the borrower’s limit if he or she has had one or more temporary repayment suspensions that total 365 days. A borrower will also reach the limit if he or she has had one or more repayment holidays under the Student Loan Scheme Act 1992 (SLSA 1992) of up to three years in duration. If a borrower has had repayment holidays of less than three years under the SLSA 1992, he or she may take a temporary repayment suspension for a period or periods equal to the lesser of: ▪ 365 days, and ▪ the remainder of the days the borrower would have been entitled to under the SLSA 1992. For overseas-based borrowers who choose to not have a temporary repayment suspension, the usual repayment rules for overseasbased borrowers will apply. See further at ¶8-045. Example: James took a repayment holiday in 2008 and 2009 for a total of 550 days. This repayment holiday falls under the provisions of the SLSA 1992. Having now completed his Master of Tax, James is intending to have a working holiday in the United Kingdom for two years. In April 2020, he applies for a temporary repayment suspension commencing 1 June 2020. The number of remaining days available to James under the SLSA 1992 is calculated as follows: 3 years × 365 days − 550 days taken 1,095 days − 550 days taken = 545 days remaining under SLSA 1992 Under the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011, Inland Revenue may only approve a maximum period or periods equal to the lesser of 365 and the remaining days available to James under the SLSA 1992. Consequently, James will only be approved for a temporary repayment suspension of 365 days or approximately half of his intended time in the United Kingdom.  Law: SLSA 2011 ss 105–108A  ¶8-055 Employers’ obligations regarding student loans  Employers or PAYE intermediaries are required to inform Inland Revenue (IR) of the amount of tax that has been deducted by including the details in their employment income information (see ¶3023). Repayment deductions are made in the same manner as PAYE deductions, ie they are paid by the 20th of the month following the period in which the deduction was made or the 5th and 20th for large employers. See ¶3-020 and ¶3-024. Repayment deductions are held in trust for the Crown. IR also has the power to instruct an employer to make the correct student loan repayment deductions from a borrower’s salary or wages. With effect from 1 April 2020, IR may notify employers of a borrower’s remaining loan balance when the borrower’s loan is close to being fully repaid. Employers will be instructed to reduce the amount of the final deduction to an amount equal to the remaining loan balance, reducing the likelihood of overpayments being made. An employer does not have to deduct loan repayments from schedular payments, election-day income or casual agricultural income. However, deductions must be made from extra pays, including lump sum payments and bonuses. Note that legislation was enacted to provide that student loan borrowers who received schedular, election-day income and casual agricultural income would also have student loan repayments deducted from their income by their employer. However, this legislation was repealed before it ever came into effect, as it was thought the compliance costs would be too high. When a change occurs to the rate at which the student loan deductions are required to be deducted from a payment of salary or wages, the deduction rate to be applied is the rate applying on the day on which the salary or wages are paid. Penalties and offences Employers’ obligations under the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (SLSA 2011) are generally subject to the compliance standards and  penalties imposed in the Tax Administration Act 1994. See Chapter 14. Employers commit an offence against SLSA 2011 if they demonstrate prejudice against an employee because of a liability to repay a student loan. An employer who commits an offence against s 163 is liable on conviction to a maximum fine of $2,000. In addition, the court may order the payment of compensation to the borrower. See s 163 and ¶8-110. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 36–39, 61, 62A, 70, sch 2  ¶8-060 Exemption from repayment of student loan for full-time students Under s 53 a full-time student is defined as a borrower who is undertaking a programme of study that: ▪ is 32 weeks or longer in duration in any 52-week period and at least 0.8 of equivalent full-time student units, or ▪ is 12 weeks or longer in duration in any 52-week period and at least 0.3 of equivalent full-time student units. (See s 10(1) of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, s 159 of the Education Act 1989).) A full-time student can apply to be exempted from the standard repayment deductions if they reasonably expect that the annual repayment threshold for the income year will not be exceeded by their: ▪ gross income from salary or wages, and ▪ adjusted net income (if applicable). Students can obtain the exemption by providing a declaration to the Commissioner specifying the tax year, exemption period and any other prescribed information.  Upon receipt of a compliant declaration from a borrower, the Commissioner will issue a notice granting the exemption and specifying the period to which the exemption applies. Where a borrower’s employer is notified in writing that an exemption from standard deductions has been granted to the borrower, then the repayment code “SL” will cease to apply and the employer will not have to make repayment deductions from the later of: ▪ the start date of the exemption period specified in the notice, and ▪ the date on which the borrower’s employer is notified in writing that the exemption has been granted to the borrower. The application of this exemption is most likely to occur where fulltime students work at a part-time or holiday job and earn more than the pay period repayment threshold, ie working three months over the summer holiday period, but over the whole year they will actually earn less than the annual repayment threshold. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 53–60  ¶8-065 Over- and under-deductions from student borrower’s income Where deductions are not made or incorrectly made from a borrower’s salary or wages, Inland Revenue (IR) is not required to take any corrective action unless the error is significant. Under s 63 the Commissioner must determine what the thresholds for significant under- or over-deductions are, taking into account the need to maintain the integrity of the student loan scheme and having regard to the resources available to the Commissioner. If a borrower reasonably believes that a significant over-deduction has been made from their salary or wages, they may request the Commissioner determine whether this is the case. Where the Commissioner identifies that a significant over-deduction has been made, the borrower then has six months from the date of the confirmation to request a refund. See s 65(2).  IR can offset the over-deduction against any under-deduction identified in any tax year, before any refund is made. See s 67(2A). If there is a significant under-deduction, the Commissioner can require additional deductions (Commissioner deductions) be made from the borrower’s salary or wages. The Commissioner must issue an additional deduction rate notice that: ▪ specifies the deduction rate applicable ▪ specifies the total amount payable, and ▪ requires the borrower’s employer to make Commissioner deductions at the additional deduction rate until those deductions equal the total amount payable. See further at ss 49 and 68. Where the Commissioner is satisfied that IR will be unable to obtain additional deductions from the borrower’s future salary or wages within a reasonable time, the Commissioner may issue a special assessment of the amount that should have been deducted. Under a special assessment the amount due is payable within 30 days of the date of assessment. In practice, a special assessment might be used in a situation where a borrower has not advised their employer that they are a student loan borrower. Refer to ss 2(4), 51 and 52. From 14 May 2016, a similar process for the over-deduction of Commissioner deductions applies as for the over-deduction of ordinary repayment deductions. If a borrower reasonably believes that a Commissioner over-deduction was made, they may request the Commissioner determine if that is the case. For these purposes, a Commissioner over-deduction is a deduction made on or after the date: ▪ the Commissioner notifies the borrower’s employer or PAYE intermediary to stop making Commissioner deductions, or ▪ the Commissioner deductions equal the amount specified in the additional rate notice.  The Commissioner must respond as soon as practicable. When the Commissioner identifies or determines that an over-deduction has been made, she must notify the borrower of the amount of the overdeduction and that it has been offset against the borrower’s consolidated loan balance, and give the borrower the option of requesting a refund of the over-deducted amount within a specified time frame. The time limit on requests for refunds is six months from the date of notification. If, however, another shortfall in repayment obligations is concurrently identified, the over-recovered amount will be offset against that shortfall. See ss 68A–68C. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 2(4), 51, 52, 63–68C  ¶8-070 Refunds of excess repayments of student loan If a New Zealand based borrower’s student loan repayments for any tax year are over the amount actually due, he or she may claim a refund in respect of that overpayment under s 132. This does not apply if the excess repayment is $5 or less. The borrower must make an election for the amount of the excess to be either refunded or credited against future repayment obligations. If no election is made for the amount to be refunded, the Commissioner must offset the overpayment against a borrower’s student loan balance. Borrowers have six months from the later of: ▪ the date they are notified of the excess repayment under s 120, or ▪ the day after the end of the tax year to which the excess repayment relates, or ▪ the day after the due date of the final instalment of the borrower’s overseas-based repayment obligation to make such an election. With effect from 9 April 2020, a refund made under the Student Loan Scheme Act (SLSA 2011) must be made in accordance with s 184A of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This section stipulates that  refunds are made only by direct credit to the borrower’s nominated bank account, unless this causes serious hardship or is otherwise impractical. No refund may be made under the SLSA 2011 or the Student Loan Scheme Act 1992 for any amount that was deducted or paid in excess before 1 April 2006. See sch 6 cl 13. With effect from 1 April 2020, IR may notify employers of a borrower’s remaining loan balance when the borrower’s loan is close to being fully repaid. Employers will be instructed to reduce the amount of the final deduction to an amount equal to the remaining loan balance, reducing the likelihood of an excess repayment being made. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 119–122, 131–132, 199, sch 6; TAA s 184A  ¶8-085 Interim loan repayments of student loan Under s 79 a borrower must make interim repayments of their student loan if: ▪ they have an end-of-year repayment obligation for a tax year of $1,000 or more, or ▪ they have not provided a statement of their adjusted net income for a tax year, and the amount of the borrower’s end-of-year repayment obligation for the preceding tax year was $1,000 or more. Adjusted net income is income other than salary or wages. See s 73 and sch 3 of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011. Interim repayments are paid in three instalments in the same way and on the same dates as provisional tax. For those provisional taxpayers who do not generally pay provisional tax in three instalments, such as those who choose to use the GST ratio method or the AIM method, special provisions ensure three relevant instalment dates for interim repayments. The interim repayment amounts are based on the previous year’s residual repayment obligation, increased by 5%. The three  provisional tax payment dates for a taxpayer with a 31 March balance date are 28 August, 15 January and 7 May. See ¶22-012. Example: Mihi is a journalist who is paying off her student loan. Her total income for the 2016– 17 tax year is $42,000. Some of Mihi’s income is from wages. From this her employer has made repayment deductions totalling $905.60 during the year. Total income for the 2016–17 tax year  $42,000.00  Less repayment threshold  $19,084.00  Residual balance  $22,916.00  Multiplied by the repayment percentage  12%  Mihi’s student loan assessment  $2,749.92  Less repayment deductions made in the 2016–17 year $905.60 Mihi’s residual repayment for 2016–17  $1,844.32  Plus 5% of residual payment  $92.22  Mihi’s 2018 interim payment amount  $1,936.54  Assuming the GST ratio method is not used to make provisional tax payments, the 2018 interim payment amount is due in three instalments: 28 August 2017, 15 January 2018 and 7 May 2018.  A borrower also has the option of estimating his or her repayment liability at any time up to the date on which the third instalment is due. Any estimate must be reasonable. Once interim payments have been estimated, a borrower may not revert to the standard option for the rest of the year. Before 1 April 2020, a borrower was liable to pay an underestimation penalty of 10% of the estimate shortfall if they had underestimated their end-of-year repayment obligation to the extent that the criteria in former s 161A were satisfied. This was generally where the estimate was less than 80% of the borrower’s end-of-year repayment obligation and was less than what the borrower’s total interim payments would have been had the borrower not estimated, and the  actual amount of interim payments made was less than 80% of the borrower’s end-of-year repayment obligation for the year. See ¶8-105 for discussion of shortfall penalties. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 79–86, 161A  ¶8-090 Cancellation of interest if consolidated student loan balance repaid early If the Commissioner notifies a borrower of his or her consolidated loan balance and the loan is repaid within 30 days of the date of such notification, the Commissioner must cancel the interest accruing between the date of notification and the date on which payment is received. Law: SLSA 2011 s 196  ¶8-095 Information sharing between Inland Revenue and Customs regarding student loans Section 208 facilitates the exchange of information between Inland Revenue (IR) and the New Zealand Customs Service. The purpose of the information matching programme is to assist the Commissioner to: ▪ verify whether borrowers are New Zealand based or overseas based ▪ verify whether borrowers are New Zealand residents for the purposes of the Act (eg for determining whether a borrower is eligible for a full interest write-off by being New Zealand based), and ▪ locate borrowers who are in serious default when they enter or leave New Zealand. IR will provide Customs with the names, aliases, dates of birth and tax file numbers of student loan borrowers. An information match will  occur by Customs comparing the name and date of birth information against any arrival or departure information it holds. If Customs has arrival or departure information relating to any borrower, it will supply IR with the time and date of arrival or departure for that particular borrower. The Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement between Inland Revenue and Internal Affairs) Order 2014 allows the supply of adult passport information to locate borrowers in serious default. Information is only shared on borrowers who are in default. Note that with effect from 1 December 2020, it has been clarified that no information may be disclosed under this provision except where either an information matching agreement has been entered into under Pt 10 of the Privacy Act 1993 and continued under the Privacy Act 2020, or an approved information sharing agreement has been entered into under subpart 1 of Pt 7 of the Privacy Act 2020. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 207–209; TAA s 18D, sch 7 cl 9  ¶8-097 Information sharing between Inland Revenue and Australian Taxation Office regarding student loans Section 209A gives effect in New Zealand law to the Arrangement for the Exchange of Information regarding New Zealand Student Loans, which was signed by the Commissioner of Taxation (Australia) and the Commissioner of Inland Revenue (New Zealand) in March 2015. The purpose is to facilitate the exchange of information between Inland Revenue (IR) and the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) to obtain or verify contact details of New Zealand student loan borrowers who are, or may be, overseas based so the student loan scheme can be administered in relation to those borrowers. IR may provide the ATO with the names, aliases, dates of birth, tax file numbers, last known address, contact details and any other relevant information of student loan borrowers. Law: SLSA 2011 s 209A; TAA s 18D, sch 7 cl 9  ¶8-100 Late payment interest and relief on student loans Late payment interest Where a borrower has not paid an amount by the due date and each individual unpaid amount is $334 or more, late payment interest will be imposed on each amount outstanding at the rate of 7.5% pa, calculated as a monthly rate as follows: (a) 0.604% of the unpaid amount on the day after its due date, and (b) 0.604% of the unpaid amount as at each day that falls one month after the day on which late payment interest was imposed in para (a) above. In accordance with s 140, the Commissioner must notify the borrower as soon as possible, after late payment interest is imposed. The late payment interest rate is calculated as the base interest rate plus 4%, calculated as an equivalent monthly rate expressed as a percentage and truncated to three decimal places. Where an instalment arrangement has been entered into with Inland Revenue (IR), a lower late payment interest rate of the base interest rate plus 2% will apply. This means the rate is 5.5% pa, calculated at a monthly rate of 0.447%. The same lower rate also applies for a borrower who is in default where the Commissioner has exercised her powers under s 157 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to require another person to deduct any amount from moneys payable by that other person to the borrower. Relief from late payment interest Relief from late payment interest is available to the borrower when the borrower applies and the Commissioner considers that, having regard to the circumstances, it is equitable to grant relief from late payment interest. The Commissioner can cancel as much of the late payment interest imposed as she considers equitable. Relief for hardship  Borrowers may seek relief from a repayment obligation if the Commissioner is satisfied that the repayment obligation is causing or would cause serious hardship to the borrower: s 147. The Commissioner also has the discretion to decrease a repayment obligation if there are other special reasons that would it make it fair and reasonable. The Commissioner may issue a special deduction rate certificate to salary or wage earners if the amount of repayments has been decreased under s 147 due to serious hardship: s 148. The certificate may specify a special deduction rate, the repayment code, and the period for which the special rate is to apply. Employees may either provide the certificate to their employer or ask IR to send the certificate directly to them. A standard practice statement, SPS 20/05, “Student loan repayment – options for relief”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 11, December 2020 at 10, sets out the practice and procedure that IR will follow when granting relief under the SLSA. Various options available to students for seeking relief from student loan repayments are also covered. These include reducing repayment amounts, a repayment exemption for full-time students or a temporary repayment suspension for New Zealand-based borrowers. See further at ¶2-119. The statement also contains several examples of what constitutes “serious hardship” and “other special reasons” for the purposes of granting relief. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 139–143, 145–148  ¶8-105 Shortfall penalties and student loans A borrower may be liable to pay a shortfall penalty for taking an incorrect tax position or for doing or failing to do anything specified in ss 141A–141E of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see Chapter 14 Penalties, Interest and Offences for further discussion of shortfall penalties).  An incorrect tax position means a position, action or omission that created a shortfall in the income tax paid or payable and has resulted in the borrower having a repayment obligation shortfall. Refer to s 158 of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (SLSA 2011). The amount of the shortfall penalty is calculated according to the formula set out in s 159 of the SLSA 2011. The student loan shortfall penalty can be up to 150% (evasion or similar act) of the shortfall in the borrower’s repayment obligation and will be the same percentage rate imposed for the borrower’s income tax shortfall. This is designed to ensure that the borrowers who do not comply are penalised on the whole shortfall and not just the income tax amount. Where the Commissioner imposes a student loan shortfall penalty on a borrower, the Commissioner must notify the borrower in writing of the following: ▪ the amount of the student loan shortfall penalty ▪ the reasons for the imposition ▪ the date on or before which the student loan shortfall penalty must be paid (at least 30 days after notification), and ▪ the amount of the repayment obligation shortfall that remains due and payable and whether that amount is subject to late payment interest. A borrower may challenge the imposition of a student loan shortfall penalty on the ground that it was imposed in error. Where a borrower challenges a shortfall penalty and is successful the Commissioner must reduce or remove the shortfall penalty. Before 1 April 2020, a borrower was also liable to pay an underestimation penalty of 10% of the estimate shortfall if they had underestimated their end-of-year repayment obligation to the extent that the criteria in former s 161A were satisfied. This was generally where the estimate was less than 80% of the borrower’s end-of-year  repayment obligation and was less than what the borrower’s total interim payments would have been had the borrower not estimated, and the actual amount of interim payment made was less than 80% of the borrower’s end-of-year repayment obligation for the year. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 157–161, 186; TAA ss 141A–141E  ¶8-110 Criminal offences under the Student Loan Scheme Act The Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (SLSA 2011) includes the criminal offences that apply for income tax purposes under the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), such as strict liability offences and knowledge and evasion offences. The same maximum penalty amounts that apply for income tax offences also apply to student loan offences. The table below summarises the offences and penalties under the SLSA 2011:  Prejudice employees  Offence  Penalty  Prejudice employees because of student loan (s 163 and see ¶8-055)  Maximum of $2,000 plus ability to award damages  Failure to provide Does not provide information information or returns to the Commissioner or other person (s 143 of the TAA)  Maximum of: $4,000 for 1st offence $8,000 for 2nd offence $12,000 for 3rd offence (s 143(3)(a)–(c) of the TAA)  Offence Knowledge offences  Knowingly:  Penalty Maximum of:  does not keep $25,000 for first documents or provide offence information or returns  Evasion  gives false, incomplete, misleading or altered information or returns  $50,000 for subsequent offences  does not make deductions  (s 143A(7) of the TAA)  applies deductions to a purpose other than payment to Commissioner  For applying deductions to another purpose, maximum penalty of $50,000 and/or a maximum term of imprisonment of five years  (s 143A of the TAA)  (s 143A(8) of the TAA)  Commits any of the knowledge offences or pretends to be another person:  Maximum penalty of $50,000 and/or a maximum term of imprisonment of five years  intending to evade the (s 143B(4) of the TAA) assessment or payment of a repayment obligation to unlawfully obtain a refund or payment  Offence  Penalty  (s 143B of the TAA) Aiding or abetting  Aids, abets, incites, conspires to commit offence (s 148 of the TAA)  Same maximum fine or term of imprisonment as person who committed offence (s 148(2) of the TAA)  Failure to pay overseas-based repayment obligations  Knowingly fails or refuses to make reasonable efforts to pay, or make arrangement to pay, amount in default  Maximum fine of $2,000  (s 162) Leaving New Zealand  Leaves or attempts to leave New Zealand when in default of overseas-based repayment obligation and court order in force  Maximum fine of $2,000 or maximum term of imprisonment of three months  (s 162B(5)) Law: SLSA 2011 ss 162, 162A, 162B, 163; TAA ss 143, 143A, 143B, 148  ¶8-115 Transfer of information between loan manager, Inland Revenue and student loan borrower The purposes of ss 10, 11, 16 and 17 of the SLSA 2011 are to authorise the transfer of information between the loan manager and the Commissioner so as to:  ▪ enable the loan manager to confirm the identity of a person who applies for a student loan, and ▪ enable the Commissioner to inform borrowers about their consolidated loan balance, and ▪ facilitate the transfer of loan advance debts from the loan manager to the Commissioner, and ▪ enable the collection of borrowers’ consolidated loan balances. Under s 12 the loan manager must provide a copy of the student loan contract within six working days after the contract is entered into. After a contract is entered into, information must be readily accessible in hard copy or via the Internet. Information like the loan balance, amounts advanced, any interest charged, the interest rate, and any fees or penalties applied must be disclosed to the borrower at least once every six months. See ss 19 and 20. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 9–20  ¶8-120 Student loan borrowers may object to details of loan advances A borrower can object to the details of a loan advance made to the borrower set out in a notification statement given to the borrower in accordance with s 18 of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011. An objection can only be made if the borrower has reasonable grounds for believing that the details are incorrect. The written objection must: ▪ clearly state the reasons for the objection ▪ include a copy of the notification provided to the borrower ▪ be received by the loan manager on or before the date stated in the notification.  The loan manager must consider all objections made in accordance with s 167. If the objection to the loan manager is disallowed, the borrower may require the objection to be determined by the chief executive. If the chief executive disallows the objection, the borrower can apply for a determination of the dispute by a Disputes Tribunal or District Court. See ss 169–171. A loan balance cannot be transferred to Inland Revenue until the objection has been resolved. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 167–172  ¶8-125 Challenges after transfer of student loan balance to Commissioner Once the loan balance has been transferred to the Commissioner, it is possible for a borrower to dispute any assessment of repayment obligations, notice of interest and penalties charged, assessments of repayment deductions, and penalty repayment obligations and penalty charges. Section 174 of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (SLSA 2011) specifies that a person may challenge a matter under Pt 4 subpart 5 of the SLSA 2011, but only after the disputes process, in relation to the matter, has been concluded. See s 173 and Pt 4A of the TAA. The disputes and challenge procedures are set out in Pts 4A and 8A of the TAA. See ¶4-120–¶4-215. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 173–187; TAA Pts 4A, 8A  SCHEDULE 1 EXEMPTIONS ¶8-130 Exemption for student loan borrower for voluntary services for charity A borrower may be treated as being physically present in New Zealand (and therefore eligible for the interest write-off) if the Commissioner considers it is fair and reasonable to do so if the main  reason they are overseas is because they are working as a volunteer or for token payment for a charity. The Commissioner may treat a borrower (absent on voluntary services) as being physically present in New Zealand for a maximum period of up to 24 months. A borrower who makes the application under s 25(1)(b) must provide proof that the work undertaken for the charitable organisation is for one or more of the following: ▪ to relieve poverty, hunger, sickness or the ravages of war or natural disaster ▪ to improve the economy of a country that is on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) list of countries receiving development assistance ▪ to raise the educational standards of a country that is on the OECD’s list of countries receiving development assistance. The Commissioner is required to maintain and publish a charities list for student loan scheme purposes. The list must include the date from which each charity’s listing applies and the date of de-listing, if applicable. The list