 statement, OS 15/01 with effect  from 6 September 2017. The statement sets out the Commissioner’s position on GST input tax claims for the costs of sale associated with mortgagee sales. The statement concludes: ▪ A mortgagee in a mortgagee sale cannot deduct the costs of sale, such as legal fees, valuation fees and real estate advertising and commission, before calculating the GST due under s 17. ▪ A mortgagee cannot claim input tax for the costs associated with a mortgagee sale. ▪ A mortgagee who is a registered person and makes a mortgagee sale that is subject to the business-to-business supply of financial services rules is able to claim input tax for the costs associated with that mortgagee sale. ▪ A mortgagor cannot claim input tax for the costs, incurred by the mortgagee, associated with a mortgagee sale. Note that the Commissioner has changed her view in OS 17/01 with regard to input tax claims for taxpayers under the business-tobusiness financial services rules from that previously set out in OS 15/01 (which stated those taxpayers were unable to claim input tax). Under the transitional position set out in OS 17/01, a registered person who had made an election under s 20F but not claimed input tax deductions for costs associated with a mortgagee sale can request the Commissioner amend the relevant assessment under s 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 or claim the input tax deduction in a subsequent period under the proviso to s 20(3). Law: GST ss 5(2), (22), 11(1)(mb), 17  ¶32-550 GST and land as secondhand goods The Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) does not provide any guidance as to whether land can be classified as “secondhand goods”. Some court decisions (mentioned below) have suggested that land is not readily classified as secondhand goods. Despite this,  Inland Revenue (IR) practice is to accept that land can be regarded as secondhand goods for GST purposes. In King v Bennetts (1994) 16 NZTC 11,370, the Court of Appeal noted the assumption of all counsel, reflecting IR bulletins, that “goods” includes land for the purposes of the provisions of the GST Act relating to secondhand goods and that a GST refund was available on a purchase of land from an unregistered vendor. The Court of Appeal also noted that it seemed open to argument whether land fell within the definition of secondhand goods, bearing in mind that the word “goods” is defined to include land unless the context otherwise requires. The position was considered further in C of IR v Coveney; C of IR v Dooley; C of IR v Swain (1995) 17 NZTC 12,193 (CA) per Richardson J at 12,194: “Under the Goods and Services Tax Act goods includes all kinds of personal or real property (s 2(1)) and the resale of land is a sale of ‘secondhand goods’.” Further support for the concept that land qualifies as secondhand goods is found in public binding ruling BR Pub 07/01, which confirms that a forestry right can be secondhand goods if the right has been used by at least one previous owner, and in Concepts 124 Ltd v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-100 (HC) it was accepted that the block of land in question was secondhand goods for GST purposes. Records Where goods are purchased from an unregistered person, a tax invoice will not be available. In these circumstances, a registered person must keep sufficient records to identify the name and address of the supplier, the date on which the goods were acquired, a description of the goods, including the quantity or volume, and the consideration for the supply. The supply must be by way of sale and the goods must be acquired for the principal purpose of making taxable supplies. See ¶32-056. If a supply is zero-rated under s 11(1)(mb), s 75(3B) requires the supplier to maintain sufficient records to enable certain particulars in relation to the supply to be ascertained. Section 75(3D) provides that where land is supplied to an agent acting for an undisclosed  principal, the supplier must maintain the name, address, and registration number or tax file number, as applicable, of the agent. Similarly, s 75(3E) provides that the agent must maintain sufficient records of the undisclosed principal to enable the name, address and, if the principal is registered or expects to be registered, the registration number of the principal, to be ascertained. Input tax deduction The input tax deduction in relation to secondhand goods is the amount “to the extent that a payment in respect of that supply has been made during that taxable period”. If land is being acquired from an unregistered person and payments made in instalments, then the input tax deduction will be the tax fraction of the amount paid on each instalment. Refer to public binding ruling BR Pub 07/01, “Forestry rights — secondhand goods GST input tax deduction” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 4). Note that where the supply is between associated persons, the input tax deduction is limited to the lesser of the tax included in the original cost of the goods to the supplier, the tax fraction of the purchase price and the tax fraction of the open market value of the supply. See, for example, the High Court decision in Concepts 124 Ltd, where the input tax deduction available was limited to the tax included in the original cost of the goods to the supplier because the parties were held to be associated persons. Law: GST ss 2(1), 11(1)(mb), 20(3), 75(3B)–(3E)  ¶32-555 GST and the sale of mixed-used property and apportionment of secondhand goods credit If the supply of a dwelling is part of a larger supply of land (such as the purchase of a farm or office block with dwelling attached), the input tax must be apportioned. This is because s 5(15) of the GST Act deems two separate supplies to occur on the resale of the property — the first being the dwelling, the second being the balance of the land. This rule was introduced in response to C of IR v Coveney; C of IR v Dooley; C of IR v Swain (1995) 17 NZTC 12,193  (CA). The Court had held that the legislation as originally drafted did not allow for the apportionment of a secondhand goods credit for the single supply of land, representing a divergence from traditional IR policy. Sections 5(15)–(19) effectively reverse the decision in Coveney (supra) and expressly provide that if a dwelling forms part of a wider supply, the supply of the dwelling is a separate supply. This position is consistent with the Commissioner’s policy before the Coveney decision, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 5, March 1992 at 2, and has been extended by the amendment of s 5(15). Section 5(15) now provides that a supply of land that is a principal place of residence or falls within s 14(1)(d) is separate from the supply of any other real property included in the supply. Persons who have previously claimed an input tax credit for a dwelling must account for output tax on the dwelling on any subsequent sale. This may create a problem for the purchaser. The difficulty occurs when the sale and purchase agreement states that the price is “plus GST (if any)”. In this case, the vendor is able to recover his or her output tax liability from the purchaser (that is, 15% of the agreed GST-exclusive value for the dwelling and curtilage) but the purchaser will not be able to claim the GST on that part of the purchase. A vendor who had not claimed an input tax credit or a one-off input tax adjustment before 1 April 2011 in relation to a dwelling will not generally have any output tax liability in relation to that supply. From 1 April 2011 taxpayers are required to apportion the amount of input tax they can claim. See further at ¶32-022, ¶32-088 and ¶32-089. Apportionment of consideration for mixed-use property In June 2020, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement IS 20/05, “GST — supplies of residences and other real property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 85), which sets out the apportionment of consideration between, and the valuation of, supplies of residences and other real property for GST purposes.  The Commissioner’s approach is to require the consideration to be apportioned so as to reflect the true value of the residence and the surrounding land. A person seeking to rely on the apportionment has the onus of proving that the apportionment is fair and reasonable. In doubtful cases, or where significant amounts of consideration are involved, the parties should obtain an independent valuation from a registered valuer. Where the supplier and recipient are both GST-registered, the same apportionment as described on the tax invoice will apply for both parties. Ideally, this should be negotiated between the parties and agreed to at the time of supply. ▸Note: Note that IS 20/05 updated and replaced IS2824, “GST — supplies of dwellings and other real property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 6, October 1996 at 1), taking into account the numerous changes to ss 5(15)–(19) since IS2824 was issued in 1996, in particular the change in wording from a “dwelling” to a “principal place of residence” in s 5(15) and the inclusion of a supply within s 14(1)(d). However, the principles applying to valuations in IS2824 remain largely unchanged. Law: GST ss 2(1), 5(15), (16), 11(1)(mb), 20(3J)  ¶32-558 GST and secondhand goods input claims for property transactions between associated persons Special rules apply for claiming input tax credits for secondhand goods for property transactions between associated persons. The rules state that the amount of input tax for the supply is limited to the amount accounted for as output tax for all supplies that are part of the relevant transactions. This applies: ▪ where a supply consists, in whole or part, of land and is part of an arrangement involving more than two associated parties and more than one supply. Here, the amount of input tax cannot exceed the amount of output tax actually accounted for on all supplies that are part of the arrangement (s 3A(3B)).  ▪ where a person registers for GST and claims a change of use input tax credit for assets and other commodities already owned at the time of registration (s 21B) and those assets or other commodities have been acquired from an associated person. The resulting change of use input tax credit here cannot exceed the output tax actually accounted for by the supplier (s 3A(3C)). Law: GST ss 3A(3B), (3C), 21B  ¶32-570 GST and residential property owners and subdivisions The GST implications of minor one-off subdivisions have been largely settled by the Court of Appeal decision of Newman v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,097. The main issue is whether the subdivision activity is carried on continuously and regularly so as to constitute a taxable activity. The courts and Inland Revenue (IR) have made the following statements: ▪ A straightforward, low-cost dividing off of one or two surplus sections and their subsequent sale would not generate a taxable activity. ▪ Subdividing off four or more sections involving significant costs comprised a “continuous” and taxable activity even though the original residence was retained for some time thereafter. ▪ IR considers that no “continuous” activity results if three sections are divided off a person’s home property and are sold, the subdivision involves minimal time and effort, and the person continues to live in the residence. However, a continuous activity might exist if other factors were involved, eg if significant and costly development work was undertaken as part of the subdivision. See discussion later in this paragraph. In Newman a taxpayer who subdivided a block of residential land into two blocks, keeping one and selling the other was initially found  to have engaged in a taxable activity (even though it was not a part of the taxpayer’s taxable activity as a builder for which he was GST registered). The Court of Appeal overturned the decision, finding that the limited activity in the case in question did not come within the statutory test of a “taxable activity”. The Court looked at the transaction as a whole, rather than break it down into a series of sequential steps. McKay J observed that it was the one-off nature of the transaction that deprived it of the necessary “continuous activity” requirement. The absence of development work and lack of business aspect to the transaction was also noted as being of particular relevance. More substantial subdivisions involving significant development work, financial investment and time and effort are likely to amount to taxable activities. For further discussion see ¶32-024. Commissioner’s interpretation of “taxable activity” IR released a policy statement on the interpretation of the term “taxable activity” in the context of subdivisions in light of Newman. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 2, August 1995 at 10. A subdivision of land into two lots, involving no development work, will not by itself constitute a taxable activity. However, in other cases the Commissioner will have regard to factors such as the scale of the subdivision, the level of development work, time and effort, financial investment and the commerciality of the transaction when determining whether a subdivision amounts to a “taxable activity”. The process of constructing and selling a commercial building will, for example, be regarded as a continuous activity and so fall within the definition. Example 1: A scheme plan that divided property into five sections was subject to GST. During the course of his judgment, Barber DCJ observed that although the Court of Appeal in Newman had settled that a one-off subdivision creating two sections is not subject to GST, the cutting off of more than one section (eg two) could also come within the Newman principles and not amount to a taxable activity. See Case S70 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,431.  Example 2: The subdivision of 2.404ha of land and the subsequent sale of the six residential lots was held to be a taxable activity and subject to GST. See Wakelin v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,182.  Example 3: A husband and wife who subdivided a block of land into five sections were found to be carrying on a taxable activity of subdividing and were liable for GST on the resulting sales. There had been a lengthy and uninterrupted period of sequential activity designed to achieve the sale of four sections, which amounted to a taxable activity. Citing Case S70 (see above), the Taxation Review Authority reiterated that a single subdivisional activity does not prevent it from being carried on “continuously”. Whether an activity is continuous involves questions of fact and degree. See Case T40 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,267.  It would appear that the greater number of allotments created and sold, the more extensive the development work, the more time and effort involved and the higher the financial commitment to the project, the more likely it is that there is a “continuous” or taxable activity. A small-scale subdivision A small-scale subdivision could also constitute a taxable activity if, for example, a taxpayer undertook several small-scale subdivisions and conducted them regularly so that, together, they constituted a taxable activity. Law: GST s 6  ¶32-580 Recovery of GST — sale and purchase agreements Going concerns Parties to a transaction who wish the supply to be zero-rated are required to elect that tax treatment in writing. If an agreement does not provide for the sale of a going concern, the vendor must insert a clause stating that the agreement is an agreement for the sale and  purchase of an activity as a going concern and that if it is not the supply of a going concern, then GST on the purchase price will be payable by the purchaser. From the vendor’s point of view considerable care needs to be taken in agreeing to the transaction being zero-rated since, if the parties are in error, the vendor is liable to account for 3/23 of the consideration for the supply to Inland Revenue (IR). However, vendors who are assessed by the Commissioner for GST in such circumstances are provided some relief by s 78E. This section allows the vendor to recover the GST amount from the purchaser, where both parties have made a written election to treat the supply as a going concern but no specific provision is made in the contract for the consequences if tax is charged on the supply. It can be seen that the risks of zero-rating are carried by the vendor. For example, the vendor could be exposed to penalties if the Commissioner does not accept the going concern treatment. There is also the practical issue of recovery from the purchaser (eg in the case of insolvency). See ¶32-035 for further discussion. Recovery of GST from purchaser If an agreement is “inclusive of GST”, the vendor is required to account for 3/23 of that price to IR. If an agreement is “exclusive of GST”, it is unclear whether the GST is recoverable from the purchaser if the vendor is then assessed for GST. Example 1: The purchase price of a property was stated in the agreement as being $138,000 (exclusive of GST if payable). The transaction was subject to GST and the vendors were assessed. The vendors claimed that the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) gave them the right to claim the GST component from the purchasers. It was held for the purchaser that the plain meaning of the contract was to exclude GST from the purchase price if it was, or was to become, payable. The price payable by the purchaser did not include GST if that became payable and the GST Act did not give any relief to the vendor to recover GST from the purchaser. See Edwards and Edwards v Dittmer (1989) 11 NZTC 6,063.  Example 2:  A lessor, who was party to an agreement containing an option to purchase that was silent as to GST, was not eligible for relief under the Contractual Mistakes Act 1977 because there was no proof that the lessee had “actual knowledge” of the existence of the lessor’s mistaken belief that the price excluded GST. The Court of Appeal allowed the lessee’s appeal against the High Court’s decision. Unless an agreement for sale and purchase provides otherwise, the price is inclusive of GST. Relief under the Contractual Mistakes Act was not granted on the basis that “constructive knowledge” was insufficient in terms of s 6(1)(a)(i) of the Act and that the lessee did not have actual knowledge of the mistaken belief held by the lessor. See Tri-Star Customs and Forwarding Ltd v Denning (1998) 18 NZTC 13,982 (CA).  The Auckland District Law Society (ADLS) and the Real Estate Institute of New Zealand (REINZ) released the 10th edition of the REINZ–ADLS agreement for sale and purchase of real estate on 27 November 2019. The 10th edition was the first thorough review of the form since 2012. The sale of commercial property is usually expressed to be “plus GST (if any)” and the sale of residential property “inclusive of GST (if any)”. If neither of the optional clauses in the standard form is deleted, the purchase price is deemed to include GST (if any). This clause formalises the common law principles established by cases such as Smale v Fletcher Homes Ltd (1996) 17 NZTC 12,662. Therefore, if no election is made the cost of the GST is effectively borne by the vendor. Section 78F(7) provides that if an agent does not have a registration number, their tax file number may be provided in its place. Current market value of property excluded GST In Sayes v Tamatekapua (2012) 25 NZTC ¶20-156 (CA), the deed of settlement did not address whether the value of property, to be transferred pursuant to a deed of settlement, was to be valued on a GST-inclusive or GST-exclusive basis. The valuation mechanism was relevant as it would determine ultimate shares in the estate. The High Court found that the current market value was determined on a GST-exclusive basis. This decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal.  The case raises some interesting questions regarding valuation methodology and the impact of the different GST registration status of the parties to the transaction. Simply agreeing to a valuation with nothing more may be insufficient to address the GST component of the price and, in particular, how this must be treated when one party is GST-registered and the other is not. While the Court of Appeal noted that the terms of the settlement deed could have unforeseen tax advantages and disadvantages, that did not allow the Court to rewrite the terms of the agreement. The Court found that the valuer had acted in accordance with the provisions of the deed and had therefore correctly valued the current market value of the property as excluding GST. Law: GST ss 11(1)(m), 78E, 78F  ¶32-590 GST and local authority rates Local authorities are required under s 5(7) to charge GST on rates. Public binding rulings BR Pub 16/01 and BR Pub 16/02 address the situation where a vendor prepays rates beyond the date of settlement and the settlement statement apportions the rates between vendor and purchaser. Similarly, public binding rulings BR Pub 16/03 and BR Pub 16/04 address the situation where the rates are in arrears and the purchaser agrees to pay the outstanding amount. In BR Pub 16/01 and BR Pub 16/02, the Commissioner considers that apportionments of rates are a part of the consideration for the seller’s supply of land. Accordingly: ▪ a GST-registered vendor must charge GST — if the supply of land is subject to GST — on the consideration including the portion of rates payable by the purchaser, and ▪ a GST-registered purchaser who is entitled to an input tax deduction for the supply of the land can also claim an input tax deduction on the portion of rates payable to the vendor.  Where the rates are in arrears and there is a credit in the settlement statement against the purchase price, the Commissioner states in BR Pub 16/03 and BR Pub 16/04 that the consideration received by the vendor is the amount received (being the purchase price less the credit for the outstanding rates that the purchaser has agreed to discharge), together with the amount of the outstanding rates. Therefore, the vendor must return GST on the actual amount received plus the outstanding rates. Similarly, a GST-registered purchaser can claim GST on the total amount of consideration, being the amount paid to the vendor and the amount of the rates paid. The rulings apply indefinitely from 24 September 2015 and are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 3. The rulings are a reissue of the previous rulings BR Pub 10/10 to BR Pub 10/13. For a discussion on the GST implications of a financial contribution under the Resource Management Act 1991 or a development contribution under the Local Government Act 2002, see ¶32-068. Law: GST s 5(7) 