 the asset is capable of being used ▪ cost includes subsequent expenditure after this point only to the extent it is allowed under the Act, and ▪ cost does not include all expenditure associated with the asset where it does not satisfy one of the above principles. The Commissioner provides examples of expenditure that may be incurred on a resource consent in the statement. Law: IT07 ss DB 19, EE 62, sch 14  ¶13-600 Trustee and executor distributions of depreciable property A disposal value is attributed when the trustees of an inter vivos trust distribute depreciable property to the beneficiaries. An exception exists when the distribution is part of an arrangement under which the beneficiary pays an amount for the property that would reasonably be expected to be paid on a disposal at arm’s length. There are also specific rules which attribute values to depreciable property on the death of a taxpayer and on the subsequent distribution of the property by the executor to the beneficiaries of the estate. Trustee distribution A trustee of an inter vivos trust may make a distribution of depreciable property to a beneficiary. The trustee may also resettle depreciable property on another trust on the exercise of a power of resettlement. On either occasion: ▪ the trustee is treated as having made a disposal of the property at its then market value, and ▪ the beneficiary or recipient trustees are treated as having acquired the property for that market value. Death Depreciable property owned by a person is transferred to the person’s administrator or executor on death. For tax purposes the transfer of the property is treated as a disposal at the property’s market value immediately before the person’s death. The executor is treated as having acquired the property at that same market value. The executor is required to ascertain whether the person’s death leads to an item of depreciation recovery income that must be recognised in the return of income for the person to the date of death. Exception to market value approach As stated above, an exception to this market value approach exists when the distribution is part of an arrangement under which the beneficiary pays an amount for the property that would reasonably be expected to be paid on a disposal at arm’s length. There is also another exception to the market value approach. The transfer of depreciable property on the death of a taxpayer to the executor may be treated as a disposal under a settlement of relationship property (see ¶13-580) if the deceased’s estate vests in the surviving spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner. For this treatment to apply, it is also necessary that those beneficiaries receive by vesting all assets that were in the tax base of the deceased (ie revenue account property, foreign investment fund interests, financial arrangements not accounted for on a cash basis and depreciable property). The practical effect of the operation of s FC 3 is that any depreciation recovery income or depreciation loss on disposal of the asset is deferred until the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner (being the final beneficiary) disposes of the inherited depreciable property. The amount of depreciation recovery income or depreciation loss on disposal will include the depreciation loss that had been claimed by the deceased and the executor or administrator when those parties owned the asset. Further, if s FC 3 applies, the transferee (being the executor or administrator and later the spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner) cannot claim more depreciation than the transferor would have been allowed. See ¶13-580. Distribution by executor A distribution of depreciable property by an executor is generally treated as a disposal at the then market value of the property. This may make it necessary for the executor to ascertain whether disposal at that value creates depreciation recovery income for the estate. The general position is subject to an exception under s FC 4 for an executor’s distribution of depreciable property when the only beneficiaries are close relatives or charities. Under this exception, the distribution can be treated as a transfer under a settlement of relationship property (see ¶13-580). A “close relative” is defined as a surviving spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner, or a person within the second degree of relationship to the deceased.  For this treatment to apply, the following requirements must be satisfied: ▪ close relatives or charities are the sole beneficiaries of the estate ▪ no life interest in the estate is created ▪ property of the estate is not to be held in trust (other than for the period of administration), and ▪ net income of the estate when the property is held by the executor is distributed to the maximum extent consistent with the terms of the will or intestacy and the executor’s legal obligations. This treatment extends to the recipient of a charitable bequest. As a consequence, the executor may not be required to recognise depreciation recovery income on distribution to the charity. See also CCH, New Zealand Tax Planning Report, No 6, December 2007. When property is transferred between associated persons, special rules may apply to restrict the cost base for the transferee when calculating depreciation (see ¶13-400). However, this restriction does not apply when property is transferred as a bequest and the disposal is required to take place at market value under subpart FC. Law: IT07 ss EE 40(11), FB 21, FC 1–FC 4, FZ 6  RECORDS ¶13-650 Records required for depreciation purposes Although no explicit record-keeping requirements have been incorporated into the depreciation rules, persons are required to keep good records of the purchase and sale of business assets so that Inland Revenue can check that deductions are correct. Records must be retained for at least seven years after the end of the tax year to which they relate, unless the Commissioner has granted approval for records to be retained for a shorter time. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 9, Appendix, April 1993 at 3. The depreciation records are commonly kept in schedule form. An example follows: Date of Purchase  Opening Book Value @ 01/04/2013  Telephone system  01/04/10  1,311.00  36% DV  12  Facsimile  01/04/11  540.00  40% DV  12  Desk  01/04/12  458.00  8.5% DV  12  Mobile phone  01/04/13  67% DV  12  30% DV  12  Asset  Proceeds Additions of sale  Profit (loss) on sale  Depreci Months Cur ation Rate in use Dep  Furniture and Fittings  200.00  (258.00)  1,000.00 2,309.00  1,000.00  200.00  (258.00)  Vehicles Mazda 323  01/04/12  23,800.00  Asset Nissan SG  Date of Purchase  Opening Book Value @ 01/04/2013  01/09/13  Profit (loss) on sale  10,000.00 23,800.00  Total Assets  Proceeds Additions of sale  Depreci Months Cur ation Rate in use Dep 30% DV  7  10,000.00  $26,109.00 $11,000.00  $200.00 ($258.00)  $  PENALTIES, INTEREST AND OFFENCES Purpose of the penalties regime  ¶14-010  Assessment of a civil penalty  ¶14-021  Scope of the penalties regime  ¶14-022  PAYE intermediaries and the penalties regime  ¶14-024  Duty of the Commissioner to report on the application of penalties ¶14-025 Civil Penalties  ¶14-030  Interest  ¶14-200  Criminal Penalties and Offences  ¶14-230  ¶14-010 Purpose of the penalties regime The purpose of the penalties regime is to: ▪ encourage taxpayers to comply voluntarily with their tax obligations and to cooperate with Inland Revenue ▪ ensure that penalties for breaches of tax obligations are imposed impartially and consistently, and ▪ sanction non-compliance with tax obligations effectively and at a level that is proportionate to the seriousness of the breach. Types of penalties Three main types of penalties are imposed by the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) under the tax penalties regime:  1. “No fault” civil penalties for matters such as the failure to file a return or make a payment on time (see ¶14-030). 2. Civil penalties that involve consideration of the degree of culpability of the taxpayer’s state of mind by reference to standard categories based on matters such as the level of knowledge of the taxpayer and the intention of the taxpayer to breach a tax law. A civil penalty is defined as: □ a late filing penalty (see ¶14-040) □ a late payment penalty (see ¶14-050) □ a shortfall penalty (see ¶14-100) □ a promoter penalty (see ¶14-123) □ a penalty under s 142H or 142I (see ¶14-048) □ a non-electronic filing penalty (see ¶14-045), or □ a civil penalty under the KiwiSaver Act 2006 (see ¶14-047). 3. Criminal penalties, where the taxpayer’s state of mind may be relevant (see ¶14-230). The majority of criminal offences are categorised as: □ absolute liability offences for not keeping or providing required information (see ¶14-240) □ offences for knowingly failing to comply with a tax obligation (see ¶14-250), and □ evasion offences (see ¶14-260). A taxpayer may be liable to both a civil and a criminal penalty in respect of the same offence. Refer to s 149(1) of the TAA. However, a taxpayer will be liable to only one shortfall penalty for each tax shortfall, with the exception being the employers’ withholding payment penalty. See ss 149(2) and 141ED.  Use of money interest The TAA states that interest payable by taxpayers for unpaid tax is not a penalty. The purpose of the use of money interest provisions is to compensate the Commissioner when tax is unpaid and compensate the taxpayer when tax is overpaid. See ¶14-200 and s 120A of the TAA. Interest is imposed in every case where there has been nonpayment, an underpayment or late payment of tax. The Commissioner has no discretion to waive interest. However, interest may be cancelled in certain circumstances. See ¶14-180. Law: TAA Pts 7, 9, ss 120A, 139, 149  ¶14-021 Assessment of a civil penalty Assessment The Commissioner can make or amend an assessment of a civil penalty (which includes a shortfall penalty) in the same way as an assessment or an amended assessment of the related tax is made. Note that the exception to this general rule is a civil penalty under s 142H or 142I (which relate to failures under the rules for the automatic exchange of information, see ¶14-048) where there is no related tax. Section 94C allows the Commissioner to make an assessment of the penalty in those cases. An assessment of a shortfall penalty must be made in the same way as the tax to which it relates; however, the penalty assessment must be separate from the assessment of the related tax. The only exception is the employers’ withholding payment penalty. See ss 94A(2) and 141ED. It is not necessary for unpaid tax to have been assessed, become assessable or payable, or been paid before a shortfall penalty is assessed. An assessment of a shortfall penalty that is made before the enactment of the annual taxing Act is calculated at the tax rates that applied for the previous income year. Subject to a specific provision in a tax law, a payment made by, or an amount applied on behalf of, a taxpayer for a shortfall penalty does  not give rise to a credit towards or in respect of any other tax or tax liability. Application of time bar provision It is the Commissioner’s view that, provided there is a “tax shortfall” (see ¶14-100), the time bar provisions (see ¶4-110) do not apply to an assessment for a shortfall penalty. Section 94A does not import the statute bar provisions (ss 108 and 108A) into the assessment of shortfall penalties. The Commissioner is not time barred from issuing an assessment for a shortfall penalty or from amending assessments of shortfall penalties, providing there is a “tax shortfall” in existence by the statute bar date. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 6, July 2004 at 31. Law: TAA ss 94A, 141ED  ¶14-022 Scope of the penalties regime The penalties regime applies to all types of tax. The definition of “tax” in s 3(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) encompasses the following for the penalties regime: ▪ a tax, levy or duty of any type imposed by a tax law, regardless of how the tax, levy or duty is described ▪ an amount deemed by a tax law to be a tax, levy or duty ▪ any other amount payable to the Commissioner under a tax law, including: □ an amount payable pursuant to one of the Commissioner’s attachment notices □ a child support compulsory deduction □ deductions of KiwiSaver contributions from salary or wages □ a short payment of KiwiSaver contributions relating to a compulsory employer contribution  □ unpaid compulsory employer contributions □ student loan repayment deductions ▪ a credit of tax under a tax law ▪ a tax similar to any of the above that is payable by a taxpayer in a country other than New Zealand, or that is relevant under a tax law for determining a tax position. “Tax” does not include: ▪ interest imposed under Pt 7 of the TAA ▪ a short payment of KiwiSaver contributions that does not relate to a compulsory employer contribution ▪ financial support (as defined in s 2(1) of the Child Support Act 1991) ▪ an end-of-year repayment obligation or an overseas-based repayment obligation (as defined in s 4(1) of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011) ▪ a civil penalty (except for the purposes of s 4A (construction of certain provisions), and Pts 7 (interest), 8 (objections), 8A (challenges), 9 (penalties), 10 (recoveries) and 11 (remission, relief, and refunds) of the TAA) ▪ a tax prescribed in a tax recovery agreement ▪ prior to 1 April 2020, an amount of a subsidy payable to a listed PAYE intermediary for a payroll service, or ▪ a secure credit or debit card payment fee charged by the Commissioner. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament  on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to the definition of “tax” designed to bring voluntary KiwiSaver employer contributions within the penalties regime in Part 9 of the TAA. The amendment is in response to legislative changes to the operation of KiwiSaver, whereby the government now pays compulsory and voluntary KiwiSaver employer contributions to KiwiSaver scheme providers before the employer pays the amounts to Inland Revenue. The proposed amendment is intended to apply from 1 April 2021. Law: TAA s 3(1)  ¶14-024 PAYE intermediaries and the penalties regime Where an employer has transferred its PAYE obligations to a PAYE intermediary, the PAYE intermediary is subject to late filing penalties, late payment penalties and shortfall penalties as if the PAYE intermediary were the employer. However, if the employer has failed: ▪ to pay the gross salary or wages to the intermediary, or ▪ to provide the information required by the intermediary within the agreed time then the late filing penalty, late payment penalty and shortfall penalties will apply to the employer, not the intermediary. See s 141JB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and ¶3-485. A PAYE intermediary is also treated as an employer for the purposes of ss 22 and 23A of the KiwiSaver Act 2006. Law: TAA s 141JB  ¶14-025 Duty of the Commissioner to report on the application of penalties At the end of each financial year, the Commissioner has a duty to notify the Minister of Finance by providing a report about the manner  in which the following shortfall penalties have been applied: ▪ not taking reasonable care ▪ unacceptable tax position ▪ gross carelessness ▪ abusive tax position ▪ evasion or similar act, and ▪ promoter penalty. The Minister must lay a copy of the report before the House of Representatives as soon as is practicable. Law: TAA s 141L  CIVIL PENALTIES ¶14-030 “No fault” civil penalties “No fault” civil penalties do not require consideration of the state of mind of the taxpayer or other culpability factors. Thus, they operate at the lowest end of the scale. While, in some cases, the Commissioner has some discretion in their imposition, the simple fact of a particular omission or default by the taxpayer is sufficient for the penalty to be imposed. These penalties are as follows: ▪ late filing penalty (see ¶14-040) ▪ late filing penalty for GST returns (see ¶32-223) ▪ non-electronic filing penalty (see ¶14-045) ▪ KiwiSaver civil penalty (see ¶14-047) ▪ late payment penalty (see ¶14-050)  ▪ imputation penalty tax (see ¶14-070), and ▪ Māori authority distribution penalty tax (see ¶14-090). Civil penalties are not deductible. See s DB 1.  ¶14-040 Late filing penalty A late filing penalty will be imposed if a taxpayer does not complete and provide on time: ▪ an annual tax return required under s 33, 41–44 or 79 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) ▪ an annual ICA return required to be filed under s 69(1) and (2)(a) of the TAA by an Australian ICA company that is not required to file a return of income ▪ an ACC reconciliation statement ▪ a return required by a multi-rate portfolio investment entity (PIE) or a proxy for an investor in the PIE ▪ a statement for payment of residential land withholding tax (RLWT), or ▪ employment income information — see ¶3-023, and the Commissioner notifies the taxpayer the penalty is payable. The late filing penalty does not apply to FBT returns. The Commissioner has also stated in IR 240, “Penalties and Interest” (June 2020), that late filing penalties for income tax returns will only be charged if an IR 3 or IR 4 is filed late. A taxpayer will not be liable to pay a late filing penalty for an annual tax return if the Commissioner considers that in a particular case or class of cases a penalty should not be imposed. However, the Commissioner may only exercise her discretion if it is necessary because of resource constraints while the two IR software platforms  co-exist and the taxpayer’s non-compliance is not serious or unreasonable. A late filing penalty also applies to GST returns — see ¶32-223. The amount of the late filing penalties are: Annual tax return — net income below $100,000  $50  Annual tax return — net income between $100,000 and $1m (both figures inclusive)  $250  Annual tax return — net income over $1m  $500  Annual ICA return, ACC reconciliation statement, statement for RLWT or employment income information  $250  The penalty is payable on notification by the Commissioner. Under s 139A(5) of the TAA the Commissioner must, not less than 30 days before imposing a late filing penalty: ▪ notify the taxpayer that a late filing penalty may be imposed if a return specified in the notice is not filed, or ▪ publicly notify that a late filing penalty may be imposed on taxpayers who omit to file the required return. Different notice requirements apply for employment income information (see ¶3-023) and GST returns (see ¶32-223). Impact of COVID-19 virus Inland Revenue has stated that, while it remains important to furnish returns as soon as possible, any late filing penalties will be waived if the return is filed late due to the impact of the COVID-19 virus. Due dates for payment of the late filing penalty — s 142 In summary, the due dates are: ▪ For late filing penalties, other than for employment income information and GST returns, the later of:  □ the date specified by the Commissioner (being not less than 30 days after the Commissioner notifies the taxpayer that the penalty is payable), and □ either: — the terminal tax date for the tax year to which the annual tax return relates — the date the Australian ICA company is required to furnish the annual ICA return, or — the date the employer is required to furnish the ACC reconciliation statement. Example: Jane receives a statement dated 30 September 2019 showing a late filing penalty. Her end-of-year tax is due 7 February 2020. The penalty is due on 7 February 2020.  ▪ For employment income information, 30 days after the end of the month in which the employment income information should have been delivered (see ¶3-023). ▪ For GST returns, see ¶32-223. Standard practice statement on late filing penalty Standard practice statement SPS 19/04, “Late filing penalty” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 44), sets out the Commissioner’s practice for imposing late filing penalties under ss 139A and 139AAA. The statement applies from 30 May 2019 and replaces the previous statement, SPS 12/02. The Commissioner’s practice is that a late filing penalty will be imposed for an outstanding income tax return if: ▪ the return is not filed by the due date and the taxpayer does not have an extension of time arrangement  ▪ the return is not filed by the date agreed under an extension of time arrangement ▪ an extension of time arrangement is withdrawn from a tax agent and the return is not filed by the date specified when the arrangement was withdrawn, or ▪ the taxpayer has an extension of time arrangement through a tax agent and the return is not filed by the 31 March immediately following the income year to which the return applies. At least 30 days’ written notice will be given of the intention to charge a late filing penalty. The notice may be made publicly or directly to the taxpayer concerned. A minimum penalty of $50 will be imposed. When the outstanding return is filed, if the net income is in a different bracket to that minimum penalty, the amount of the penalty is adjusted. The minimum penalty will remain payable if the return filed shows a loss. See ¶3-023 for a discussion of the Commissioner’s practice on the application of a late filing penalty in relation to employment income information. Reversal or remission The Commissioner’s practice is that a late filing penalty may be reversed in the following circumstances: ▪ the return was filed but had not been “lodged” by IR before the date on which the late filing penalty was imposed ▪ the return or employment income information was not required to be filed, or ▪ with respect to employment income information, the employer was registered as an employer but no salaries or wages were paid in that period. With respect to remission of a late filing penalty, the statement states that a taxpayer must meet the legislative criteria in ss 183A and  183D of the TAA (see ¶14-180). Further, the Commissioner’s practice is that a late filing penalty will not be remitted if: ▪ a taxpayer has an extension of time through a tax agent but the tax agent has not advised IR that the taxpayer is a client before the late filing penalty was charged, or ▪ a taxpayer gains an extension of time, either through a tax agent or individually, after the late filing penalty was charged. Law: TAA ss 139A, 142  ¶14-045 Non-electronic filing penalty Employers must provide their employment income information on a payday or twice-monthly basis to the Commissioner. The online group of employers is required to file their information electronically and within two working days after payday (see ¶3-023). A nonelectronic filing penalty is payable if the information is not filed or is filed in a non-prescribed format (unless the employer is authorised to do so). The non-electronic filing penalty is a monthly penalty. Regardless of how often an employer fails to file electronically in a calendar month, the maximum penalty is $250 or $1 for each employee for whom information should have been filed in that month. The non-electronic filing penalty is due 30 days after the end of the month in which the employment income information was due to be received in a prescribed electronic form or by means of the prescribed electronic communication. Example: F Charm Ltd withholds more than the threshold amount of $50,000 of PAYE and ESCT. The company has been notified by Inland Revenue that from a specified future date, they will be in the “online group” and required to provide employment income information electronically and that the due date for the information will be two working  days after payday. They are also advised that if they believe they have grounds, they can apply for an exemption from electronic filing. F Charm Ltd does not seek an exemption and has not changed their filing method by the time the notice period expires. They pay staff weekly and the number employed varies. In July the numbers reported each week varied from 70–90 but over the month 95 different employees were reported as being paid. The last payday in July was the Thursday 26th and the information should have been received electronically on Monday July 30th. The returns were submitted on paper and failed to meet the new due dates. The non-electronic filing penalty for the month is the greater of $250 or $1 for each employee whose information is not filed electronically, which in this case was 95. F Charm Ltd is penalised $250 for not filing electronically in July. The due date for the penalty is 30 August. Because it was the first occasion (month) in a 12–month period on which they had failed to file on time, F Charm is notified that a further failure to file on time will incur a late filing penalty. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 19.  Portfolio investment entities (PIEs) are also required to make returns in electronic format. PIEs are subject to the same non-electronic filing penalty. See ¶29-150. With effect from 29 March 2018, GST-registered persons over a taxable supplies threshold will be required to file their GST return electronically, although the threshold has not yet been set (see ¶2019). Once the threshold is set and the electronic filing requirement is activated, a non-electronic filing penalty will also apply to GST returns. The penalty will be $250 and it will also be due and payable 30 days after the end of the month in which the GST return was due. The non-electronic filing penalty also applies to investment income payers who fail to provide their investment income information in a prescribed electronic form. For investment income information, the penalty is $250. The penalty is due 30 days after the end of the month in which the investment income information was due to be received in a prescribed electronic form or delivered by the prescribed means of electronic communication. The Commissioner has a discretion not to impose the non-electronic filing penalty if she considers it should not be imposed in a particular case or class of cases. However, the Commissioner may only  exercise her discretion if it is necessary because of resource constraints during the period of co-existence of two IR software platforms and the taxpayer’s non-compliance is not serious or unreasonable. See ¶14-180 for remission provisions. Law: TAA ss 36BD, 139AA, 142G  ¶14-047 Penalties under the KiwiSaver Act The KiwiSaver Act 2006 (KSA) sets out penalties that apply, in addition to the provisions of the Tax Administration Act 1994, if there is a failure to provide information under Pt 2 or 3 of the KSA or a failure to withhold KiwiSaver contributions. An employer who fails to provide information required under Pt 2 or 3 of the KSA is liable for a penalty. See ss 214 and 215 of the KSA. Where the Commissioner has not given notice to the employer within the preceding 12 months that a penalty may be imposed, or that the employer has been liable in the preceding 12 months, the penalty will be nil. In any other case, the penalty is $50 for small employers and $250 for other employers. A “small employer” is defined in s 215(4) of the KSA as an employer whose gross PAYE and employer’s superannuation contribution tax deductions in the previous tax year were less than $100,000 in total. Section 215(3) of the KSA specifies that an employer is not liable for more than one penalty per month. The penalty is due and payable on the day on which the next tax deduction required to be made by the employer under the PAYE rules is due to be paid to the Commissioner after the end of the PAYE period in which the failure occurred. Law: KIW ss 214, 215  ¶14-048 Penalties relating to information-sharing agreements  As part of the legislation implementing the global standard for the automatic exchange of information, the Common Reporting Standard (CRS) has been incorporated into New Zealand law (see ¶26-280). The CRS requires implementing jurisdictions to have rules and procedures in place to ensure compliance and address noncompliance. This includes the following penalties. Absolute liability penalties A penalty of $300 applies if a financial institution does not comply with any CRS due diligence or reporting requirement: s 142H(1). However, this penalty will not be imposed if the failure was due to circumstances beyond a financial institution’s control: s 142H(2)(a). A penalty of $300 also applies if a financial institution fails to obtain self-certifications on opening a new financial account when this is required by CRS: s 142H(3). During the transitional period to 30 June 2019, the above penalties were not applied if the Commissioner was satisfied that the financial institution made reasonable efforts to comply with its obligations and corrected the failure within a reasonable period of time after becoming aware of it: s 142H(2)(b) and (4). The total amount of these penalties for a reporting period must not exceed $10,000: s 142H(6)(a). Negligence penalties A financial institution can be subject to a penalty for a lack of reasonable care in complying with its CRS due diligence and reporting requirements under s 142H(5). However, a penalty under this section can only apply if neither of the above absolute liability penalties have been imposed. The penalty for lack of reasonable care is $20,000 for the first default and $40,000 for each subsequent default. Penalties for this category of offence cannot exceed $100,000 in total for a reporting period: s 142H(6)(b). Information providers There are also penalties of a more specific nature in s 142I concerning due diligence actions of account holders, controlling  persons, or persons who otherwise hold accounts for the benefit of others (including trusts and intermediaries). A penalty of $1,000 applies to a person or entity (the information provider) who: ▪ provides false information (other than in a self-certification) relating to the information provider ▪ signs or affirms a false self-certification ▪ provides false information (other than in a self-certification) relating to another person or entity ▪ provides a false self-certification for another person or entity ▪ fails to provide information (including a self-certification for the information provider or another person or entity) after being requested to do so ▪ fails to disclose a material change in a self-certification or information that has been provided. An information provider who has failed to satisfy the requirements for providing information, including a self-certification, will not be liable to a penalty if the Commissioner is satisfied the failure occurred through no fault of the information provider. Similarly, no penalty is imposed for a failure to provide information, including a selfcertification, relating to another person or entity and not within the control of the information provider, if the Commissioner is satisfied that the information provider has made reasonable efforts to comply. Assessment of penalties Section 94C allows the Commissioner to issue an assessment for the penalty that, in the Commissioner’s judgment, should be imposed on a financial institution with obligations under Pt 11B of the Tax Administration Act for financial accounts it maintains. Liability for the amount so assessed applies unless the financial institution, person or entity establishes by way of a challenge that the assessment is excessive or they are not chargeable with the penalty.  The due date for payment of a penalty assessed under s 142H or 142I is the later of 30 days after the date the Commissioner issues the assessment and the date specified in the assessment for payment. Law: TAA ss 94C, 142H, 142I  ¶14-050 Late payment penalty A taxpayer will be liable for a late payment penalty if and to the extent that the taxpayer does not pay by the due date an amount of tax calculated by the taxpayer as payable or for which the taxpayer is assessed and any one or more of the following apply: ▪ the unpaid tax is provisional tax or a penalty relating to a failure to pay provisional tax (see ¶22-200) ▪ the taxpayer has failed to pay an amount of tax on time within the previous two years (ignoring any failure to pay for which a penalty or interest has been remitted) ▪ the taxpayer has paid all amounts of tax on time within the previous two years (ignoring any failure to pay for which a penalty or interest has been remitted) and the Commissioner notifies the taxpayer of a further date for payment of the unpaid tax and the taxpayer does not pay before the earlier of that further date and one month from the notice. Grace period Therefore, a grace period exists whereby the Commissioner notifies the taxpayer the first time a payment is late, rather than immediately imposing a late payment penalty. Thus, unpaid tax may not be subject to a late payment penalty where: ▪ the taxpayer has punctually paid all taxes due in the two years prior to the default in question, and ▪ the unpaid tax is paid within the time of up to one month allowed in a notice from the Commissioner specifying a further payment  date for the unpaid tax. However, if the taxpayer does not make payment within that notified further period, or the taxpayer makes other late payments within two years of the due date of the first late payment, the late payment penalty is imposed as usual from the day after the due date. It is possible for the Commissioner to apply a grace period and then determine that the grace period should have been applied to an earlier period. This may occur, for example, when a return is filed late and a grace period has already been applied to a subsequent return when it should have been applied to the late return. To ensure that the taxpayer benefits from the grace period, the grace period is applied to the first default identified. See s 139B(5B). If a taxpayer enters an instalment arrangement before the due date for payment of tax (known as a pre-emptive instalment arrangement), the second stage of the initial late payment penalty is not imposed. See s 139B(5C) and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, Part II, October/November 2009 at 113. In addition, the grace period does not apply for the period when a pre-emptive instalment arrangement is entered into but applies at a later date if the taxpayer inadvertently misses a payment. This reinforces the policy of the grace period — to ensure that the taxpayer who inadvertently misses a payment is not penalised. The notion of unpaid tax extends to a late payment penalty already imposed on other unpaid tax. The late payment penalty is then added to the unpaid tax and included in the calculation of future late payment penalties incurred on unpaid tax. As part of Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation programme, Inland Revenue’s current computer platform, FIRST, is being replaced with a new software system known as “START”. Since 5 February 2017, the Commissioner may ignore defaults in payment if: ▪ doing so is necessary due to tax types being administered from different systems as a result of the co-existence of FIRST and START, and  ▪ doing so would not result in the imposition of a penalty that is greater than would otherwise have been imposed (had she not ignored these defaults in payment). Components of late payment penalty The components of a late payment penalty added to the unpaid tax are as follows: ▪ an initial late payment penalty: □ 1% is added on the day after the due date for payment of the unpaid tax, and □ 4% is added at the end of the seventh day after the due date, and ▪ an incremental late payment penalty: 1% of the amount of tax still unpaid is then determined and added at successive monthly intervals. The 1% incremental late payment penalty is not payable if the relevant tax is: ▪ GST for a GST return period ending on or after 24 March 2017 ▪ provisional tax and income tax for the 2017–18 or later income years ▪ Working for Families tax credit overpayments for the 2017–18 or later income years ▪ further income tax under the imputation or Māori authority credit account provisions for the 2018–19 and later income years ▪ imputation additional tax for the 2018–19 and later income years, or ▪ a civil penalty for taxes and periods described in the above bullet points.  The late payment penalty does not apply if the unpaid tax is $100 or less. See s 183F. The Commissioner’s views on when a tax payment is received are set out in standard practice statement SPS 20/04, “Tax payments — when received in time”. See ¶2-115. Use of money interest (see ¶14-200) is charged on the unpaid tax from the original due date until the date of assessment and on: ▪ unpaid tax and shortfall penalties from the date of the assessment until the date payment of all outstanding amounts is made, and ▪ late payment penalties as they accrue. Attachment notices The 4% initial late payment penalty is not charged if the Commissioner has exercised her powers to issue attachment notices to persons holding funds owed to the defaulting taxpayer (see ¶2190) before the end of the seventh day after the due date for payment of the tax and the Commissioner has received the tax deducted in accordance with the notice. See s 139B(3B). Similarly, the 1% incremental late payment penalty is not charged if the Commissioner has issued attachment notices and has received the tax deducted in accordance with the notices issued. See s 139B(5A). Non-charging of penalty for seeking financial relief The 4% initial late payment penalty is not charged if the person with outstanding tax asks the Commissioner for financial relief before the default date for payment of the tax. However, the 1% initial late payment penalty will still be charged. See s 139BA(1). If the person asks for financial relief on or after the default date for payment of the tax, the 1% incremental late payment penalty is not charged from the date of request. However, the 1% and 4% initial late payment penalty will still be charged. See s 139BA(2).  The period of time to which the above applies is from the time the person seeks financial relief until the earlier of: ▪ the date the Commissioner makes a decision not to give financial relief, and ▪ the expiry of the 20 working days (or such other period allowed) for the person to provide further information requested by the Commissioner or to respond to a counter offer. If an instalment arrangement is entered into, the 1% incremental late payment penalty will not be charged if the person complies with all of the person’s obligations under the arrangement. All late payment penalties will be charged if: ▪ an instalment arrangement is cancelled on the basis of false or misleading information provided by the person, or ▪ financial relief is not given. For details on the application for financial relief, see ¶2-119. Law: TAA ss 139B, 139BA, 183F  ¶14-055 Large multinational group penalty With effect from 27 June 2018, the Commissioner’s power to request information has been extended to members of a large multinational group (see ¶1-590). The Commissioner also has the ability to impose a fine of up to $100,000 as a civil penalty on members of large multinational groups that fail to comply with a s 17B request for information or documents. The penalty is payable on the date specified by the Commissioner in the notice of assessment of the penalty, which must be at least 30 days after the notice is issued. A large multinational group is defined to mean a consolidated accounting group that has:  ▪ a New Zealand resident member or income with a source in New Zealand ▪ a non-resident member, and ▪ annual consolidated group revenue equal to or exceeding the revenue threshold of font=Arial charset=unicode code=8364 descr='[euro]'750m. This threshold is based on the revenue threshold set in para 5.53 of the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 139AB, 142GB  ¶14-060 New due date for tax payment that is not a penalty If a taxpayer has been assessed with tax and the Commissioner increases the amount of the assessment after the due date for payment of the assessed tax, the Commissioner must fix a new date for the payment of the increase in tax. Notice of the new due date must be given to the taxpayer in the notice of the increase of assessment. A new due date must also be set if a taxpayer has made a return that quantifies an amount of tax that is payable by a due date and, after the due date, the Commissioner assesses an increased amount of tax as being payable by the taxpayer. If an assessment of tax is increased less than 30 days before the due date for payment of the tax, the Commissioner must, in the notice of increase of assessment, fix a new due date for payment of the tax or increased tax. Any new due date must fall at least 30 days after the date of issue of the notice of assessment. The Commissioner is not required to set a new due date in the following circumstances: ▪ if the unpaid tax is provisional tax that remains unpaid on an instalment date  ▪ if the assessment is a default assessment ▪ if the Commissioner has notified the taxpayer before the due date for the payment of the tax that no new due date will be set in respect of the tax as calculated or estimated by the taxpayer, or ▪ if the Commissioner considers that setting a new due date may prejudice the ability to recover the tax or increased tax. It has been clarified that a new due date is not set when the Commissioner makes a systems-generated electronic default assessment. It has also been clarified that when a taxpayer files a return following a systems-generated electronic default assessment, a new due date is set for the resulting tax liability. For the purposes of setting a new due date, “tax” does not include a civil penalty (ie a late filing penalty, late payment penalty, shortfall penalty, promoter penalty, non-electronic filing penalty or civil penalty under the KiwiSaver Act 2006). Once a new date is set for the payment of unpaid tax, penalties and interest, and the total amount is paid on or before that new due date, no use of money interest is charged for the period between the date of the assessment notice and the new due date. However, if payment is not made by the new due date, late payment penalties are charged on the unpaid tax and (depending on the degree of culpability) any shortfall penalty due as at the new date. With effect from 5 February 2017, amendments to s 142A removed the requirement to set a new due date for the payment of tax resulting from a new or amended assessment made by the Commissioner. The timing and application of use of money interest and late payment penalties remained unchanged. The Commissioner can apply credits or refunds that become available in payment of the taxpayer’s tax liability from the moment the Commissioner has made a new or increased assessment. Under the old rules, with the setting of a new due date, any credits or refunds available before the new due date were generally refunded as they  could not be offset against the upcoming liability as it was not yet “due”. Inland Revenue’s FIRST computer system was unable to give additional time before the imposition of late payment penalties without setting a new due date. The new software platform (START) is able to use the original due date for payment but still allow time for payment before the imposition of late payment penalties. The new rules apply to a tax type as and when the administration of that tax type is transitioned to START (which will happen in four stages). Changes made from 1 April 2018 aligned the due date for payment of tax for default assessments, removing the distinction between electronic default assessments and manual default assessments. A subsequent reassessment resulting in an increase when the return is filed is treated as due at the original due date. These amended rules in s 142AB only apply when the assessment relates to a tax type that has been migrated to the new START system and when incremental penalties do not apply to the particular tax type. However, to the extent that the amended rules do not apply by 1 April 2023, they will automatically apply from that date. To date, s 142AB applies to a new assessment, or an increased assessment, for GST (from 18 June 2018) and income tax (from 8 July 2019) and s 142A does not apply for those tax types. Law: TAA ss 142A, 142AB  ¶14-070 Imputation penalty tax Section 140B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) imposes imputation penalty tax on a company that is liable for further income tax under s OB 65 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (IT07) or additional imputation tax under s OB 72 of the IT07. Under s OB 65, a company is liable to pay further income tax as a result of having a debit balance in its imputation credit account (ICA) at the end of the imputation year (ie 31 March). Where a company is liable to pay further income tax, it is also liable to pay imputation penalty tax. The imputation penalty tax is 10% of the debit balance in the ICA on 31 March. Imputation penalty tax is payable on 20 June  following the end of the imputation year in which the debit balance arose. See s 142E of the TAA. Law: IT07 s OB 65; TAA ss 140B, 142E(1)  ¶14-090 Māori authority distribution penalty tax Section 140CB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 imposes a special tax known as Māori authority distribution penalty tax on a Māori authority liable for further income tax under ss OK 21 and OK 22 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (IT07). Under ss OK 21 and OK 22, a Māori authority is liable to pay further income tax as a result of having a debit balance in its Māori authority credit account at either the end of the tax year (ie 31 March) or immediately before it stops being a Māori authority. See ¶24-327. Where a Māori authority is liable for further income tax, it is also liable to pay penalty tax under s 140CB. The penalty tax is 10% of the debit balance in the Māori authority credit account on 31 March. Law: IT07 ss OK 21, OK 22; TAA s 140CB  ¶14-100 Standard-based civil shortfall penalties A shortfall penalty is a penalty imposed on a taxpayer under any of ss 141A–141K for taking an incorrect tax position or for doing or failing to do any of the things required by those sections. The standard-based civil shortfall penalties apply to: ▪ failure to take reasonable care — ¶14-112 ▪ an unacceptable tax position — ¶14-115 ▪ gross carelessness — ¶14-117 ▪ an abusive tax position — ¶14-119, and ▪ evasion — ¶14-121.  Each shortfall penalty is defined by a level of culpability and the greater the culpability, the greater the penalty. Tax shortfall The central concept in the application of standard-based penalties is tax shortfall. A tax shortfall is both the situation that must arise before a penalty can be imposed and the amount on which the penalty is based. Shortfall penalties are calculated as a percentage of the shortfall of tax owed by the taxpayer. A taxpayer may be liable for only one shortfall penalty for each tax shortfall. Where a taxpayer could otherwise have been liable for more than one penalty, the highest shortfall penalty is imposed. See s 149(3). Where a taxpayer has been prosecuted for a criminal offence, a civil penalty may still be imposed whether or not the prosecution has been successful: see s 149(4). For example, the Commissioner may impose a penalty for failure to take reasonable care in circumstances where a taxpayer was found not guilty of a knowledge offence. However, if a shortfall penalty has been imposed on a taxpayer for taking an incorrect tax position, the Commissioner may not subsequently prosecute the taxpayer for taking that incorrect tax position. See s 149(5). A shortfall penalty (employers’ withholding payment penalty) is imposed for not paying amounts due on providing employment income information. This penalty is different from the other shortfall penalties in that it can be imposed more than once if the shortfall continues to be outstanding. See further at ¶14-124. “Tax shortfall” is defined in s 3(1) of the TAA as the difference between the tax effect of: ▪ a taxpayer’s tax position for the return period, and ▪ the correct tax position for that period when the taxpayer’s tax position results in too little tax paid or payable by the taxpayer or another person, or overstates a tax  benefit, credit, or advantage of any type or description by or benefiting the taxpayer or another person. However, where an employer has not elected to withhold tax from an employee’s share scheme income under s RD 7B of the Income Tax Act 2007 (IT07) (see ¶3-470), the tax shortfall will be the same as if they had elected to pay PAYE on the benefit. There is no basis for differentiating in this respect between employers who do and those who do not withhold PAYE. Tax position The term “tax position” is defined in s 3(1) of the TAA as a position or approach with regard to tax under a tax law. A “taxpayer’s tax position” is also defined and means a tax position taken in or in respect of a tax return, an individual’s final account that is treated under s 22I as a return of income or a due date. Tax positions are not limited to income tax. They will be taken in relation to almost all taxes, levies and duties, including GST. A tax position includes a position or approach with regard to: ▪ a liability for an amount of tax or the payment of an amount of tax ▪ an obligation to deduct or withhold an amount of tax, or the deduction or withholding of an amount of tax ▪ a right to a tax refund, or to claim or not to claim a tax refund ▪ a right to a credit of tax, or to claim or not to claim a credit of tax ▪ the provision of a tax return, or the non-provision of a tax return ▪ the derivation of an amount of income or exempt income or a capital gain, or the inclusion or non-inclusion of an amount in income ▪ the incurring of an amount of expenditure or loss, or the allowing or denying as a deduction of an amount of expenditure or loss  ▪ the availability of a tax loss component or loss balance, or the use of a tax loss component or loss balance ▪ the attaching of a credit of tax, or the receipt of or lack of entitlement to receive a credit of tax ▪ the balance of a tax account or memorandum account of any type or description, or a debit or credit to such an account ▪ the estimation of provisional tax payable ▪ the use of the accounting income method (AIM) for provisional tax and the software product of an approved AIM provider ▪ whether the taxpayer must provide information to the Commissioner on the income other than reportable income that they derive for a tax year ▪ the application of Pt 3, subpart 3B of the TAA (Reporting of income information by individuals) ▪ a right to a tax credit, or ▪ prior to 1 April 2020, the amount of a subsidy claimed under s RP 4 of the IT07 to a listed PAYE intermediary. Separate calculations A separate tax shortfall calculation is required for each return period, tax type and tax position taken by the taxpayer. However, if a debit adjustment in one tax type results in a corresponding credit adjustment in another tax type, the credit will be offset against the debit for the purposes of calculating the tax shortfall. If the two tax types in question have different return periods, the Commissioner may specify that part of one or more return periods for one of the tax types is to be treated as the same return period for the other tax type. See s 141(2), (3), (6) and (9).  When there is a tax shortfall in respect of the same tax type, the overstatement is offset against the understatement. When there are multiple tax shortfalls for the same tax type, there is a set-off of the overstatements on a pro rata basis against all understatements. See s 141(5). The Commissioner may treat companies in a wholly-owned group as one taxpayer for the purposes of calculating a tax shortfall. See s 141(8). Associated persons Where two taxpayers are associated persons and a debit adjustment in one taxpayer’s return causes a credit adjustment in the return of an associated person, the refund will be offset against the debit, with the effect of reducing the tax shortfall. See s 141(7). The Commissioner has the right to exercise discretion in relation to a taxpayer and an associated person when implementing s 141(7) if there is an overlap in return periods and the taxpayer’s tax position is not an abusive tax position and does not involve evasion. See s 141(7B). Where a taxpayer is a member of an internal software development group and credits have been reallocated within the group, there will be no tax shortfall as long as the reallocations are offsetting. See s 141(7C) and (7D). Similar or identical tax shortfalls within the same return period will be aggregated and treated as one tax shortfall. See s 141(10). Law: TAA ss 3(1), 141, 149  ¶14-112 Shortfall penalty for not taking reasonable care At the core of the shortfall penalties is a minimum standard of reasonable care. If a taxpayer does not exercise “reasonable care” in taking a tax position, the taxpayer is liable to a penalty of 20% payable on the resulting tax shortfall. The shortfall penalty for not taking reasonable care is capped at $50,000 if:  ▪ the taxpayer voluntarily discloses the shortfall, or ▪ the shortfall is detected by audit within the later of: □ three months after due date of the relevant return, and □ the lesser of one return period or six months following the due date of the return. The cap will not apply in cases of obstruction. See ss 141JAA and 141K. For further discussion of the reduction of the penalty where voluntary disclosure of a tax shortfall is made, see ¶14-130. The common law test for negligence (whether a person with ordinary skill and prudence would have foreseen a tax shortfall) is relevant. Example: Tom has spent the past 10 years travelling around the world in his luxury launch. During the 2013–14 income year, Tom settles in New Zealand to retire. His income is made up of dividends, interest and rental income sourced from various investments situated in Australia, Canada, Italy, the USA and New Zealand. On the recommendation of a close friend, Tom engages Mr Count of Conservative & Co, chartered accountants, to prepare his 2013–14 income tax return. However, Tom makes no effort to gather the required information until there are only three weeks before the return must be filed. While doing so, he makes little effort to check for the completeness of the information that he has on hand and omits mentioning $10,000 of interest earned from Australia during that income year. Tom also completes and signs an end-of-year standard questionnaire provided by Mr Count. The questionnaire is designed to ensure that all income details are provided to Mr Count in order for Tom’s tax return to be completed and that Tom is aware that his return will be prepared from the information provided by him. In this case, it is likely that Tom would be subject to a shortfall penalty for lack of reasonable care. This is because he did not take reasonable care when gathering the information for the return, ie he did not act in the way that a person of ordinary skill and prudence would have acted in his circumstances. The fact that Tom engaged Mr Count to prepare his return does not preclude him from the penalty. This is because Mr Count prepared Tom’s return from the information provided by Tom and, according to the questionnaire completed by Tom, all sources of income for the 2013–14 income year had been provided.  Other factors going to the issue of reasonable care include the complexity of the law and the transaction, the size or materiality of  the shortfall, the size and nature of the business, and the type of record-keeping systems in place. Interpretation statement on not taking reasonable care In October 2005, the Commissioner issued interpretation statement IS0053, “Shortfall penalty for not taking reasonable care”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 9, November 2005 at 3. The main features of the interpretation statement are as follows: ▪ The standard of “reasonable care” under s 141A involves establishing what a reasonable person would do in the same circumstances and takes into account such factors as the age, health and background of the taxpayer in question. ▪ Guidance is given on how the standard of reasonable care is applied to various types of taxpayers, eg business persons, clients of agents and tax specialists. ▪ The application of the standard is also examined in certain situations, such as receipt of Inland Revenue advice, complexity of the law, materiality and arithmetical errors. ▪ The reasonable care standard does not mean perfection, but refers to the effort required commensurate with the reasonable person in the taxpayer’s circumstances. ▪ In determining whether the standard of reasonable care has been met, the Commissioner will consider the likelihood of a tax shortfall, the quantum of the shortfall and the difficulty of preventing a tax shortfall. ▪ While a taxpayer is liable for the actions of their employees, the question of whether the taxpayer has taken reasonable care must still be considered. ▪ The shortfall penalty for not taking reasonable care can be reduced for the taxpayer’s previous behaviour, voluntary disclosure or where the tax shortfall is temporary. (The penalty  can also be increased where the taxpayer obstructs the Commissioner.) ▪ In the Commissioner’s view, s 141JAA, which provides for the penalty payable to be capped in some situations, is only applicable after other reductions have been made. The interpretation statement refers to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 7, October 1996, which lists the following circumstances that may be taken into account when determining whether a taxpayer has exercised reasonable care: ▪ the complexity of the law and the transaction (the difficulty in interpreting complex legislation) ▪ the materiality of the shortfall (the gravity of the consequence and the size of the risk) ▪ the difficulty and expense of taking the precaution, and ▪ the taxpayer’s age, health and background. For a business, reasonable care may also take into account: ▪ the size and nature of the business ▪ the internal controls in place ▪ the record-keeping practices of the business, and ▪ systems failures. The reasonable care standard therefore applies not only to the completing of tax returns but also to the systems and procedures in place to ensure that the figures used in tax returns are correct. The standard considers whether adequate records have been maintained and whether items have been substantiated properly. It also requires taxpayers to make reasonable attempts to clarify any uncertainties they may have regarding the appropriate treatment of an item.  In Case Y21 (2008) 23 NZTC 13,227, the Taxation Review Authority held that a shortfall penalty for lack of reasonable care was appropriate as a shortfall occurred and the taxpayer’s lack of financial records had caused his affairs to become muddled, so that he was found to be acting with disregard for the consequences. Advice received from tax professional A standard of reasonable care may be satisfied if a taxpayer has obtained the advice from a reputable tax professional. This is subject to the onus remaining on the taxpayer to provide all proper records and relevant facts, and the taxpayer not relying unreasonably on the tax professional or on wrong advice. In other words, the taxpayer is not vicariously liable for the carelessness of a tax agent. Section 141A(2B) sets out the circumstances in which a penalty can be imposed on taxpayers for not taking reasonable care when they, or a company in the same group of companies, have used a tax advisor. The circumstances are where the taxpayer: ▪ is the tax advisor’s employer ▪ provides inadequate information to the tax advisor ▪ provides inadequate instructions to the tax advisor ▪ has reason to believe that the action or advice of the tax advisor is incorrect, or ▪ has had a previous tax shortfall penalty imposed for the same error within the past four years and does not take reasonable steps to avoid the further tax shortfall. A taxpayer who takes an “acceptable tax position” is deemed to have taken reasonable care. See s 141A(3) of the TAA. An “acceptable tax position” is a tax position that is not an “unacceptable tax position”. For the meaning of “unacceptable tax position”, see ¶14115. However, a taxpayer who takes an acceptable tax position but has made a calculation or processing error in his or her return could  still be liable for a shortfall penalty for not taking reasonable care. See s 141A(4). Law: TAA ss 141A, 141JAA  ¶14-115 Shortfall penalty for unacceptable tax position Where a taxpayer takes an “unacceptable tax position” the penalty is 20% of the resulting tax shortfall. An “unacceptable tax position” is one that, when viewed objectively, fails to meet the standard of being about as likely as not to be correct. Case U47 (2000) 19 NZTC 9,410 considered the interpretation of s 141B (before its amendment in 2003) and the meaning of the phrase “being about as likely as not to be correct”. The Commissioner adopted the approach taken in Case U47 as to the meaning of the phrase in the interpretation statement IS0055, “Shortfall penalty — unacceptable interpretation and unacceptable tax position”, issued in October 2005 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 9, November 2005 at 26). In that statement, the Commissioner’s view was that the term “about as likely as not to be correct” means that there must be, at least, about an equal chance of a position being likely to be correct as it is to be incorrect. The use of the word “about” makes the test less stringent but the position still needs to be close to or around 50% likely to be correct. However, the Commissioner has also expressed the view that the term means that a position need not necessarily be the correct position, or one that has a 50% chance of success, but must be a position that is capable of being seriously considered by a court. A taxpayer does not take an unacceptable tax position merely by making a mistake in a calculation or a processing error in a return or in recording of numbers for use in preparing a return. See s 141B(1B). However, where such an error is made, a shortfall penalty for not taking reasonable care could still be imposed. See s 141A(4). Reliance on Inland Revenue advice  A taxpayer will not be subject to the unacceptable tax position penalty if they relied on a Commissioner’s official opinion. This means, for a taxpayer: ▪ an opinion of the Commissioner concerning the tax affairs of the taxpayer, communicated by the Commissioner after all relevant and correct information has been provided ▪ a finalised official statement of the Commissioner notifying the taxpayer, if it specifically applies to the taxpayer’s situation. The definition of “Commissioner’s official opinion” excludes private binding rulings. This is because where a taxpayer has relied on a private binding ruling, reliance on the ruling should mean that the taxpayer will not be subject to the unacceptable tax position penalty in any event. See ss 3(1) and 141B(1D). See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 69–70. Use of AIM for calculating provisional tax A taxpayer does not take an unacceptable tax position merely by using an accounting income method (AIM) and an approved AIM provider’s AIM-capable accounting system (see ¶22-090). See s 141B(1E). However, this exclusion does not apply to a taxpayer with a gross annual income of more than $5m or who uses a large business AIM-capable system. See s 141B(1F). Application The unacceptable tax position shortfall penalty applies only if the resulting tax shortfall exceeds a certain threshold. The tax shortfall must exceed both $50,000 and 1% of the taxpayer’s total tax figure for the relevant return period. See s 141B(2). The shortfall penalty for taking an unacceptable tax position is capped at $50,000 if the taxpayer voluntarily discloses the shortfall, or the shortfall is detected by audit, no later than the later of: ▪ three months after due date of the relevant return, and  ▪ the lesser of one return period or six months following the due date of the return. The cap will not apply in cases of obstruction. See s 141JAA. For further discussion of the reduction of the penalty where voluntary disclosure of a tax shortfall is made, see ¶14-130. Matters to be considered in determining whether a taxpayer has taken an unacceptable tax position are: ▪ the relevant tax laws, and ▪ court and Taxation Review Authority decisions. Inland Revenue has stated that other factors it might take into account include the commentary to the Bill enacting the relevant law, relevant binding rulings, articles written by tax professionals and related material (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 7, October 1996 at 17). See also Case W3 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,014 at 11,033. The time at which a taxpayer takes a tax position will generally be when the taxpayer files a tax return. The unacceptable tax position penalty does not apply to shortfalls that arise for GST and withholding-type taxes. That is, the unacceptable tax position penalty only applies to income tax shortfalls. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 141B, 141JAA  ¶14-117 Shortfall penalty for gross carelessness Where a taxpayer is grossly careless, they will be liable for a shortfall penalty payable of 40% of the resulting tax shortfall. Gross carelessness is defined in s 141C(3) as doing or not doing something in a way that, in all the circumstances, suggests or implies complete or a high level of disregard for the consequences. The purpose of the gross carelessness shortfall penalty is to cater for breaches that fall just short of the evasion category but go  beyond a lack of reasonable care. Example: In Case W4 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,034, a taxpayer purchased and sold a property within six months. A GST input tax credit was claimed on the purchase, but no GST output tax was returned on the sale. The omission was discovered during an audit of a later GST return. The Commissioner imposed a 40% shortfall penalty for gross carelessness for the omission. The Taxation Review Authority held that the taxpayer was grossly careless in failing to account for the GST output tax, whether the test was objective or subjective. The taxpayer had a very high level of disregard for the consequences of his actions when completing his GST returns. See also Case W3 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,014 at 11,032.  A taxpayer will not be grossly careless if the taxpayer takes an “acceptable tax position”. See s 141C(4). An “acceptable tax position” is a tax position that is not an “unacceptable tax position”. For the meaning of the term “unacceptable tax position”, see ¶14115. Interpretation statement on gross carelessness An interpretation statement IS0060, “Shortfall penalty for gross carelessness”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 8, September 2004 at 10, sets out the Commissioner’s interpretation of the term “gross carelessness” in s 141C. The statement, which draws largely on Case W4 discussed above, argues that gross carelessness is similar to recklessness but unlike evasion which also involves recklessness, it does not require an element of mens rea or intent to breach a tax obligation. Briefly, the statement provides that: ▪ the test for gross carelessness is objective and is based on what a reasonable person would foresee as being conduct that creates a high risk of a tax shortfall occurring, and ▪ gross carelessness involves recklessness but, unlike evasion, does not require an element of intent to breach a tax obligation. The statement contains a discussion that distinguishes between gross carelessness and the shortfall penalty for not taking  reasonable care. Guidance is also provided on how the gross carelessness standard is applied to various situations. Law: TAA s 141C  ¶14-119 Shortfall penalty for abusive tax position The purpose of the abusive tax position shortfall penalty is to penalise those taxpayers who, having taken an unacceptable tax position, enter into arrangements or interpret or apply tax laws with a dominant purpose of taking or supporting the taking of tax positions that reduce or remove tax liabilities or give tax benefits. Where a taxpayer takes an “unacceptable tax position” with the dominant purpose of avoiding tax, the penalty payable is 100% of the resulting tax shortfall. See s 141D(3). An “unacceptable tax position” is one that, when viewed objectively, fails to meet the standard of being about as likely as not to be correct. For more on the meaning of “unacceptable tax position”, see ¶14-115. Reduction of penalty for abusive tax position A shortfall penalty for an abusive tax position is reduced from 100% to 20% if: ▪ a taxpayer is a party to an arrangement to which a promoter penalty might apply and becomes liable to a shortfall penalty for an abusive tax position as a result of that arrangement ▪ the sum of the tax shortfalls from the arrangement for the taxpayer and persons associated with the taxpayer is less than $50,000, and ▪ the taxpayer has independent advice stating that the taxpayer’s tax position is not an abusive position. See s 141D(3B). The reduction in penalty applies whether or not a promoter penalty has been imposed in respect of the arrangement. For more on promoter penalties, see ¶14-123. Interpretation statement on abusive tax position  The Commissioner has issued an interpretation statement IS0061, “Shortfall penalty for taking an abusive tax position”. The statement is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 1, February 2006 at 24 and applies to tax positions taken on or after 1 April 2003. In brief, the penalty applies when the taxpayer has taken an unacceptable tax position and has either: ▪ entered into an arrangement which has the dominant purpose of avoiding tax, whether directly or indirectly (s 141D(7)(b)(i)), or ▪ when there is no arrangement, or no arrangement of the type outlined above, taken the tax position with a dominant purpose of avoiding tax, whether directly or indirectly (s 141D(7)(b)(ii)). The interpretation statement also makes the following points: ▪ The phrase “dominant purpose of avoiding tax” means that the most influential and prevailing purpose of the arrangement, or the taxpayer, is to avoid tax. ▪ The term “avoiding tax” includes the concept of “tax avoidance” under the general or specific anti-avoidance provisions, and those situations where tax is avoided or is attempted to be avoided, but the general or specific anti-avoidance provisions are not invoked. ▪ Factors that may be taken into account when determining whether there is a “dominant purpose of avoiding tax” are: □ artificiality and contrivance □ circularity of funding □ concealment of information and non-availability of evidence, and □ spurious interpretations. ▪ The Commissioner considers that it is the dominant purpose of the arrangement that is tested in s 141D(7)(b)(i), not the  taxpayer, ie the taxpayer does not have to have a dominant purpose of avoiding tax for this provision to apply. A penalty will arise under this subsection if the taxpayer has taken their tax position directly or indirectly in respect of an arrangement that they have entered into and the dominant purpose of the arrangement is tax avoidance. ▪ When applying s 141D(7)(b)(ii), the “dominant purpose” of avoiding tax is a test of the taxpayer’s purpose. This subsection will apply where there is an unacceptable tax position and the taxpayer takes the position with the purpose of avoiding tax. Section 141D(7)(b)(ii) has potential application where there is no arrangement or where there is an arrangement but it cannot be shown that the arrangement itself has a dominant purpose of avoiding tax. Law: TAA s 141D  ¶14-121 Shortfall penalty for evasion or similar act The purpose of the shortfall penalty for evasion or a similar act is to provide a penalty for taxpayers who, in taking a tax position: ▪ evade the assessment or payment of tax for themselves or others ▪ knowingly misapply a deduction or withholding of tax ▪ knowingly do not make tax deductions or withhold tax ▪ knowingly do not transfer payroll donations to a donee organisation ▪ obtain a refund or a payment of tax, or attempt to do so, with the knowledge that the taxpayer is not lawfully entitled to the refund or payment  ▪ enable another person to obtain a refund or a payment of tax, or attempt to enable that person to do so, with the knowledge that the other person is not lawfully entitled to the refund or payment. Under s 141E(4) the shortfall penalty payable for evasion or a similar act is 150% of the resulting tax shortfall. Example: The taxpayer in Case W3 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,014 was held liable for a shortfall penalty for evasion after two cheques for payment of PAYE were dishonoured and an investigation identified discrepancies.  Section 141E(2) provides that no shortfall penalty will be chargeable for failure to account for deductions or withholdings to the Commissioner if the taxpayer can prove that: ▪ the amount has been accounted for, and ▪ the taxpayer’s failure to account within the prescribed time was caused by illness, accident or some other cause beyond the person’s control. Interpretation statement on evasion An interpretation statement IS0062, “Shortfall penalty — evasion”, was released in November 2006 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 11, December 2006 at 7). The statement focuses on what constitutes evasion or “a similar act” in the context of s 141E. Briefly, the statement provides that: ▪ evasion occurs when a taxpayer deliberately breaches a tax obligation ▪ evasion requires the taxpayer knew or strongly suspected the course of conduct would breach a tax obligation, ie intentional behaviour or subjective recklessness (negligence or carelessness is insufficient)  ▪ acts or omissions that constitute a “similar act” to evasion all require that the act or omission occur “knowingly” ▪ in this context, “knowingly” requires that the taxpayer has knowledge of doing the act (or the omission), not knowledge that the act or omission is in breach of a tax obligation ▪ the knowledge requirement can be satisfied by actual knowledge of or subjective recklessness toward the doing of the act (or of the omission) (negligence and carelessness are insufficient) ▪ the statutory defence (in s 141E(2)) that can apply to s 141E(1) (b) (ie misapplying a deduction or withholding of tax) applies only where the deduction has since been accounted for and the taxpayer establishes (on the balance of probabilities) that the illness, accident or other cause beyond their control directly caused the breach, and ▪ apportionment of a shortfall penalty (provided for in s 141F(2)) between the taxpayer (for example, a company) and the officer of the taxpayer involved is possible where the breach is failure to make or account for a deduction, or misapplying or permitting misapplication of a deduction. The criteria for determining the apportionment are the relative actions or omissions of the taxpayer and the officer involved, and the reasonableness of those actions or omissions. It is the Commissioner’s view that “subjective recklessness” is sufficient to satisfy the mens rea requirement of evasion. Recklessness is the conscious taking of a risk, ie knowing the facts of a risk and choosing to ignore them. However, if a taxpayer is genuinely unaware of an obligation so as not to have any intention to try to avoid it (objective recklessness) then a penalty for gross carelessness or lack of reasonable care is more likely to apply than a penalty for evasion. In contrast to other shortfall penalties, the onus of proof for a shortfall penalty for evasion rests with the Commissioner. The Commissioner  must prove that is it more probable than not that the taxpayer has the mens rea for evasion. The requisite knowledge, intention or the doing of the act (or omission) may be drawn from an objective analysis of the circumstances and conduct of the taxpayer. Negligence or carelessness, on the part of the taxpayer, will be insufficient to satisfy the test. Law: TAA s 141E  ¶14-122 Officers liable to pay certain penalties Where a taxpayer is required to make or account for a deduction or withholding of tax under a tax law and an officer of the taxpayer fails to make that deduction, or permits it to be applied for a purpose other than payment to the Commissioner, one shortfall penalty may be imposed for each tax position taken by the taxpayer. The tax shortfall on which the penalty is being imposed may be apportioned by the Commissioner between the taxpayer and the officers involved having regard to: ▪ the acts or omissions of the taxpayer and the officers, and ▪ whether those acts or omissions were reasonable in the circumstances of the case. “Officer” is defined in s 3(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 for these purposes to include: ▪ a director or secretary or other statutory officer of a corporate body ▪ a receiver or manager of any property of a corporate body or a person with similar powers, and ▪ a liquidator of a corporate body. This definition is inclusive, ie it is not limited to the persons above. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 141F  ¶14-123 Promoter penalties Section 141EB imposes a civil penalty on promoters of certain arrangements that are intended to produce taxation-related benefits. The penalty applies where a shortfall penalty for an abusive tax position is imposed on a taxpayer party to the arrangement. The arrangement must be offered, sold, issued or promoted to 10 or more persons in a tax year and will be treated as such if 10 or more persons claim tax-related benefits as a result of the arrangement. An arrangement offered, sold, issued or promoted to a look-through company (LTC) or partnership is treated as being offered, sold, issued or promoted to all owners of effective look-through interests in the LTC or all partners of the partnership respectively. The amount of the promoter penalty is the greater of nil and the sum of the tax shortfalls for taking an abusive tax position that the promoter would have been liable for had the promoter: ▪ been a party to the arrangement in place of each party to the arrangement to whom the arrangement was offered, sold, issued or promoted ▪ taken a tax position under which the arrangement is treated as producing, for the promoter, the taxation-related benefits intended by the parties to the arrangement, and ▪ had the taxation-related characteristics that would produce for the promoter the maximum taxation-related benefits from the arrangement. See s 141EB(4). Who is a promoter? A “promoter” is defined in s 141EC to mean: 1. a person who is party to, or is significantly involved in formulating, a plan, software or programme from which an arrangement is offered 2. a person who is aware of material and relevant aspects of the arrangement and who sells, issues or promotes the selling or  issuing of the arrangement, whether or not for remuneration, or 3. a person who provides services on a contingency fee basis in relation to research and development tax credit claims. A person is not a promoter where his or her involvement with the arrangement is limited to providing legal, accounting, clerical or secretarial services to a promoter. See s 141EC(2). A promoter of the kind described in 1 above is jointly and severally liable with any other such promoters for the whole promoter penalty. The promoter is also jointly and severally liable with any other promoter of the arrangement who is a promoter of the kind described in 2 above. The liability is for the part of the promoter penalty for which that other promoter is liable. A promoter of the kind described in 2 above is also jointly and severally liable with all promoters for the portion of the promoter penalty that is associated with the arrangement entered into by taxpayers to whom that promoter offered, sold, issued or promoted the arrangement. Standard practice statement on promoter penalties The Commissioner published standard practice statement INV-290, “Promoter penalties”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 2, March 2004 at 18. The statement details the following: ▪ the criteria ▪ promoter ▪ offered, sold, issued or promoted ▪ calculating the penalty ▪ multiple promoters ▪ imposition of a promoter penalty ▪ disputable decision  ▪ independent advice — reduction of investor’s penalty, and ▪ previous behaviour — reduction of penalties. Law: TAA ss 141EB, 141EC  ¶14-124 Employers’ withholding payment penalty A shortfall penalty is imposed when a taxpayer provides employment income information but does not pay an amount of tax owing on the due date. Inland Revenue (IR) must, after the due date for paying the required amount, give notice to the taxpayer of the following: ▪ that the taxpayer is liable to pay a penalty for failing to pay the unpaid amount by the due date and how the penalty is calculated, and ▪ the circumstances in which further penalties will be imposed and how further penalties will be calculated, and ▪ the actions the taxpayer may take to avoid the imposition of further penalties. Prior to sending this notice IR must first notify the taxpayers that a penalty may be imposed under s 141ED if the unpaid amount is not paid. See s 141ED(2). Amount of penalty The amount of the penalty imposed is: ▪ 10% of the unpaid amount on the day before the penalty date, if the taxpayer fails to agree to an instalment arrangement with the Commissioner and to pay the unpaid amount before the day that is one month after the penalty date ▪ 10% of the unpaid amount on the day before the penalty date, if the taxpayer agrees to an instalment arrangement with the Commissioner before the penalty date, but then fails to comply  with that arrangement before the day that is one month after the penalty date, or ▪ 5% of the unpaid amount on the day before the penalty date, if the taxpayer pays the unpaid amount or agrees to an instalment arrangement after the penalty date and before the day that is one month after the penalty date, and complies with that arrangement. Penalty date The penalty due date (the penalty date) is: ▪ the date of the Commissioner’s notice if the penalty is the first penalty for the unpaid amount, or ▪ one month after the penalty date for the preceding penalty, if the above does not apply. More than one shortfall penalty for an employers’ withholding payment penalty can be imposed on an employer for the same liability (ie on a month-by-month basis). However, the total amount of penalties imposed cannot exceed 150% of the original amount owed. In addition, the Commissioner is not precluded from subsequently prosecuting the taxpayer for taking an incorrect tax position. See s 141ED(6) and (7). Instalment arrangements The penalty does not apply where the taxpayer is negotiating an instalment agreement to pay the unpaid amount. It applies where the taxpayer agrees, before the penalty date, to an instalment arrangement of the same type as provided for in s 177B, and pays the unpaid amount under that instalment arrangement. There is also a limited exception from the shortfall penalty for receivers or liquidators who have insufficient funds to pay the schedule amount. See s 141ED(3). Under s 183F(1)(c) a taxpayer will not be liable to pay an employers’ withholding payment penalty if the unpaid amount on the day before  the date of the Commissioner’s notice under s 141ED(1)(b) is $100 or less. Law: TAA ss 141ED, 149(2), (5)  ¶14-125 Reduction of shortfall penalties for previous behaviour Shortfall penalties may be reduced by 50% if a taxpayer has a past record of “good behaviour” or good compliance. The shortfall penalties imposed under ss 141A–141E will be reduced to 50% if the taxpayer is not: ▪ convicted of a disqualifying offence, or ▪ liable for a disqualifying penalty. Disqualifying offence A “disqualifying offence” means: ▪ an offence under s 143A, 143B, 143F, 143G, 143H or 145 for which a conviction is entered on or after 26 March 2003 and before the taxpayer takes the tax position to which the current penalty relates ▪ an offence under s 143 or 144 that relates to the same tax type as the current penalty and for which a conviction is entered on or after 26 March 2003, within the specified time period and before the taxpayer takes the tax position to which the current penalty relates. The specified time periods are: Tax type  Time period  Income tax and four years before the tax position was taken to other tax types which the current penalty relates PAYE, GST,  two years before the tax position was taken to  FBT, RWT  which the current penalty relates  Disqualifying penalty The definition of a “disqualifying penalty” in s 141FB depends on which shortfall penalty is being considered. For the reduction of a shortfall penalty imposed under any of ss 141A–141D, a “disqualifying penalty” is defined as a shortfall penalty that: ▪ relates to the same tax type as the current penalty ▪ if the current penalty is for gross carelessness or taking an abusive tax position, is a shortfall penalty for evasion or a similar act or for gross carelessness or taking an abusive tax position ▪ if the current penalty is for not taking reasonable care or taking an unacceptable tax position, is a shortfall penalty of any sort ▪ is not reduced for voluntary disclosure by taxpayer, and ▪ relates to a tax position that is taken on or after 26 March 2003, within the specified time period, and before the date on which the taxpayer takes the tax position to which the current penalty relates. The shortfall penalties for not taking reasonable care, for taking an unacceptable tax position, for gross carelessness and for taking an abusive tax position are reduced by 50% if the taxpayer has not been liable to pay a shortfall penalty within the previous four years. The four-year period is reduced to two years in the case of shortfall penalties imposed in respect of PAYE, fringe benefit tax, goods and services tax and resident withholding tax. Only shortfall penalties imposed in respect of the same tax type are taken into account so that, for example, a shortfall penalty imposed within the two-year period that applies in respect of PAYE will not prevent a shortfall penalty relating to fringe benefit tax being reduced for “good behaviour”. Furthermore:  ▪ penalties reduced as a result of voluntary disclosure are not taken into account, and ▪ shortfall penalties for not taking reasonable care and for taking an unacceptable tax position are not counted in determining whether a shortfall penalty for gross carelessness or taking an abusive tax position should be reduced for “good behaviour”. For the reduction of a shortfall penalty imposed under s 141E, “disqualifying penalty” is defined as a shortfall penalty that: ▪ relates to the same tax type as the current penalty ▪ is for evasion or a similar act ▪ is not reduced for voluntary disclosure by taxpayer, and ▪ relates to a tax position taken on or after 26 March 2003 and before the date on which the taxpayer takes the tax position to which the current penalty relates. The “good behaviour” period is not limited to four years in the case of the shortfall penalty for evasion or a similar act. This shortfall penalty is reduced by 50% only if the taxpayer has not previously been liable for a shortfall penalty for evasion or a similar act. In determining “good behaviour”, only shortfall penalties imposed for evasion or a similar act for the same tax type are taken into account and penalties reduced as a result of voluntary disclosure are not counted. For shortfall penalties imposed under any of ss 141A–141E, a taxpayer will be treated as not liable for a shortfall penalty that relates to a tax shortfall arising from another tax position taken by the taxpayer, if: ▪ the Commissioner identified both tax shortfalls in the same investigation or voluntary disclosure, and ▪ the taxpayer: □ takes both tax positions on the same date  □ is not liable for a shortfall penalty within the specified time period prior to taking the tax position. Standard practice statement Standard practice statement SPS 06/03, “Reduction of shortfall penalties for previous behaviour”, sets out the Commissioner’s policy regarding the practice of reducing shortfall penalties imposed under ss 141A–141E for previous behaviour in accordance with s 141FB. Key comments in the statement include: ▪ Generally, a taxpayer will be convicted of a disqualifying offence when the taxpayer is sentenced. A guilty plea is not a conviction. ▪ If a taxpayer is convicted of but discharged from a disqualifying offence, the taxpayer will be treated as if the taxpayer has been convicted. ▪ If a taxpayer is discharged from a disqualifying offence without conviction, the taxpayer has not been convicted of a disqualifying offence for the purposes of s 141FB. ▪ A reduction in a shortfall penalty for previous behaviour applies separately to each tax type, ie a penalty imposed in relation to PAYE does not preclude a previous behaviour reduction for a later shortfall penalty relating to GST. ▪ The start date of the probation period is determined by counting back from the date the taxpayer takes the tax position giving rise to the current penalty. The statement includes a number of detailed examples that illustrate how the standard practice statement will be applied (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 6, July 2006 at 30). Law: TAA s 141FB  ¶14-130 Reduction in penalty for voluntary disclosure of tax shortfall Shortfall penalties may be reduced if the taxpayer makes a full voluntary disclosure to the Commissioner of all the details of the tax shortfall either: ▪ before the taxpayer is first notified of a pending tax audit or investigation (referred to as “pre-notification disclosure”), or ▪ after the taxpayer is notified of a pending tax audit or investigation but before the Commissioner starts the audit or investigation (referred to as “post-notification disclosure”). For pre-notification disclosure, the penalty is reduced by 100% where the shortfall penalty is for not taking reasonable care, for taking an unacceptable tax position or for an unacceptable interpretation. For all other cases the penalty is reduced by 75%. See s 141G(3). For post-notification disclosure, there will be a 40% reduction of the shortfall penalty. In accordance with s 141G(2) the Commissioner may specify the information required for a full voluntary disclosure and the form in which it must be provided. Notification of audit or investigation Under s 141G(4), a taxpayer is deemed to have been notified of a pending audit or investigation, or that the audit or investigation has started, if any of the following persons have received the relevant notification: ▪ the taxpayer ▪ an officer of the taxpayer ▪ a shareholder of the taxpayer (for close companies) ▪ a tax adviser acting for the taxpayer  ▪ a partner in partnership with the taxpayer, or ▪ a person acting for, or on behalf of, or as a fiduciary of the taxpayer. An officer includes a director, secretary, or other statutory officer, a receiver or manager, and a liquidator, but does not include an employee. Notification of a tax audit or investigation is not required to be in writing. Verbal notification is sufficient. See Case X20 (2006) 22 NZTC 12,260. Although note that the Commissioner has stated in SPS 16/03, “Notification of a pending audit or investigation”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 7, August 2016, that notification will generally be in writing and communicated by post, facsimile, personal delivery or electronic means, and will meet the requirements of ss 14 to 14G of the Tax Administration Act 1994. There are a few exceptions, for example, where Inland Revenue (IR) holds anonymous information or suspects tax avoidance or evasion, the visit is intended to be unannounced (such as a spot check), or it is impractical to send a letter due to time constraints. An audit or investigation starts at the earlier of: ▪ the end of the first interview between an IR officer and the taxpayer or taxpayer’s representative after the taxpayer has received notification of the investigation, and ▪ the time when an IR officer inspects the taxpayer’s information after the taxpayer has received notice of the investigation and has also been notified of the inspection. See s 141G(5). SPS 16/03 outlines what actions taken by IR officers will constitute notification of a pending audit or investigation in accordance with s 141G. SPS 16/03 should be read together with standard practice statement SPS 19/02, “Voluntary disclosures” (see below).  SPS 16/03 confirms and further clarifies that not all contact with a taxpayer regarding their tax affairs relates to an audit or will necessarily lead to an audit. IR investigators will be required to clearly communicate the purpose of their contact. When the contact is to notify of a pending audit or to advise that one has begun, the communication will use the word “audit” or “investigation”. That notification will only occur once a decision has been made to audit the taxpayer. Making a voluntary disclosure Standard practice statement SPS 19/02 sets out the Commissioner’s guidelines for making a voluntary disclosure (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 157). The statement replaced SPS 09/02 from 27 March 2019. To make a “full” voluntary disclosure, the taxpayer must provide the following information to the Commissioner in respect of each shortfall: ▪ sufficient details so that the Commissioner can identify the taxpayer (name, trade name, IRD number), and the taxpayer’s contact details (postal address, contact telephone number(s), email address) ▪ the tax periods and tax types involved ▪ an explanation as to why the tax shortfall occurred ▪ sufficient detail of the tax shortfall, including its amount and full details of the facts and circumstances leading to the tax shortfall, to allow a correct assessment of the tax shortfall, and ▪ any further information that is necessary to enable a correct assessment. IR provides a form, IR 281 “Voluntary disclosure”, for taxpayers to make their disclosure. However, voluntary disclosures may be made by a taxpayer in person, by telephone or in writing, including by modifying their existing tax return by using myIR. To ensure there is  a clear record of all the details of the voluntary disclosure, the ability to accept a voluntary disclosure by telephone is limited to calls that are received by IR at a site that has call recording. For practical purposes, this means that a taxpayer will need to call using one of IR’s 0800 numbers. A taxpayer is not able to make a voluntary disclosure in relation to a matter that they wish to dispute, nor will the Commissioner accept a voluntary disclosure that is conditional on a particular outcome or conditional on the Commissioner carrying out (or not carrying out) a particular act. Although the amount of the tax shortfall has to be disclosed by the taxpayer, exact quantification is not required. However, if the taxpayer makes little or no attempt to quantify the tax shortfall, or deliberately understates the tax shortfall, the voluntary disclosure cannot be a full voluntary disclosure. If the taxpayer is not able to quantify the exact amount of the tax shortfall, it is expected that the taxpayer will co-operate with IR to work out the amount of the tax shortfall. The Commissioner’s view is that disclosure of a shortfall that is already known to the Commissioner will still amount to a disclosure unless: ▪ the Commissioner has expressly advised the taxpayer of the tax shortfall, or ▪ the facts and circumstances of the interactions between the taxpayer and the Commissioner clearly indicate that it was reasonable for the taxpayer to infer that the Commissioner already knew of the tax shortfall. Any decision to not accept a voluntary disclosure on this basis will be made by a senior officer. An audit of a parent company or a subsidiary may necessitate the audit of other subsidiaries within the group. Disclosure would depend upon which entity had been notified. If the parent company received notification that the audit was restricted to that entity any disclosure made by the subsidiary is a voluntary disclosure prior to notification  of an audit. However, if another company in the group has been notified that the audit is being extended, any disclosure made by that other company would be considered a disclosure after notification of an audit. When a company has a branch or branches, they are considered to have been notified at the same time as the company, as they are part of the company and not separate entities. Each tax shortfall is considered separately. If there is more than one tax shortfall, one being the subject of voluntary disclosure and the other being detected by an audit, the shortfall detected by the audit does not come within the voluntary disclosure regime. Items which are identical or similar are treated as one tax shortfall. For a full and complete voluntary disclosure all items need to be disclosed prior to the end of the first interview. If one of the items is not disclosed until after the first interview the taxpayer does not satisfy the requirements of a full and complete disclosure. If a voluntary disclosure is full and complete: ▪ IR does not generally consider prosecution action for prenotification disclosures, and ▪ in other cases, prosecution may be considered in cases of evasion or similar offences or where the taxpayer has a history of serious non-compliance. IR also has a booklet available on this: IR 280, “Putting your tax returns right”, February 2017. Limitation on reduction in shortfall penalty for voluntary disclosure Section 141J provides that a shortfall penalty cannot be doubly reduced for both a voluntary disclosure, made in accordance with s 141G or 141H, and because of a temporary shortfall. See further at ¶14-142. Law: TAA s 141G  ¶14-135 Reduction in penalty for adequate disclosure of unacceptable tax position The shortfall penalties for taking an unacceptable tax position and for taking an abusive tax position may be reduced by 75% if the taxpayer makes adequate disclosure of his or her tax position at the time at which the tax position is taken (generally, when the taxpayer files a tax return). See s 141H. However, there will be very few circumstances where the taxpayer would willingly disclose in the return that an unacceptable tax position has been taken. The better strategy would be to take advice before embarking on a transaction and, if advice is to the effect that the position is an acceptable one, returns should be filed on this basis without the need for any disclosure. Alternatively, a binding ruling could be obtained. See ¶1525. If disclosure is made at the time of filing, disclosure form IR 282, “Statement in support of a tax position”, April 2014, will be required to be filed in conjunction with the return in which the particular tax position has been taken. The following information will be required to satisfy the requirement of adequate disclosure: ▪ taxpayer’s details (name, IRD number, address, date of birth, contact details) ▪ overview of the position taken ▪ interpretation of relevant case law, tax opinions obtained or legal articles ▪ any relevant IR public ruling ▪ a calculation (if necessary) illustrating how the tax position was arrived at, and ▪ a declaration and signature by the taxpayer.  For e-filed returns, the disclosure form will need to be forwarded separately to IR. Limitation on reduction in shortfall penalty for voluntary disclosure Section 141J provides that a shortfall penalty cannot be doubly reduced for both a voluntary disclosure, made in accordance with s 141G or s 141H, and because of a temporary shortfall. See further at ¶14-142. Law: TAA s 141H  ¶14-140 Reduction in penalty for temporary shortfall A shortfall penalty (including a promoter penalty) must be reduced by 75% if and to the extent that the tax shortfall is temporary. A tax shortfall is a temporary tax shortfall if the Commissioner is satisfied, at the time she considers the imposition of the penalty, that: ▪ the tax shortfall has been or will be permanently reversed or corrected: □ within four years of the taxpayer’s tax position □ by the taxpayer paying the correct amount of tax (disregarding penalties and interest), and □ as a result of the taxpayer’s actions or by the operation of law or circumstances ▪ no future tax shortfall will arise for a similar tax position, and ▪ there is no arrangement to create a further related tax deferral or advantage. See s 141I(3). The extended interpretation of temporary shortfall applies to all types of tax, including income tax. Case Z11 (2009) 24 NZTC 14,131 confirmed that it is the taxpayer and not the Commissioner who must correct the error before there  can be a temporary shortfall attracting the reduction in shortfall penalty. Standard practice statement on permanent reversal Inland Revenue’s position on permanent reversal as it applies to a temporary shortfall is set out in standard practice statement INV-231 which is reproduced in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 8, September 1999 at 22. The statement observes that to reverse a situation does not necessarily mean to achieve a complete remedy. It only means to take steps that will lead to the remedy in due course. That proposition could apply where, say, a property developer claimed a full GST input tax credit on a purchase from an unregistered person instead of a credit to the extent of payment (eg the deposit). The statement indicates that upon the taxpayer claiming the entire GST input claim in the first GST return, the taxpayer has made the reversal. This is because no claim for an input credit relating to the same property purchase will be made in a later return. The reversal will be treated as made when the full input claim was made in the earlier return. The taxpayer would be entitled to a 75% reduction for a temporary shortfall. Section 141I only applies to reduce the shortfall penalty. Any late payment penalty and interest imposed will still be payable, unless their remission is obtained under another provision. Law: TAA ss 141I, 141J  ¶14-142 Limitation on reduction in penalty Section 141J provides that a shortfall penalty cannot be doubly reduced for both a voluntary disclosure and because of a temporary shortfall. If a voluntary disclosure has been made in respect of a temporary tax shortfall and the shortfall penalty would otherwise be reduced in accordance with s 141G or 141H, then the shortfall penalty will only be reduced by 100% if:  ▪ the shortfall penalty is for not taking reasonable care, for taking an unacceptable tax position or for taking a tax position involving an unacceptable interpretation of a tax law, and ▪ the tax shortfall is voluntarily disclosed under s 141G before notification of a pending tax audit or investigation by Inland Revenue. In all other cases the shortfall penalty will be reduced by 75%. Law: TAA s 141J  ¶14-145 Shortfall penalty capped at $50,000 The shortfall penalties for not taking reasonable care and for taking an unacceptable tax position are capped at $50,000 if the taxpayer voluntarily discloses the tax shortfall under s 141G, or the Commissioner determines the shortfall, no later than the date that is the later of: ▪ the date three months after the due date of the relevant return, and ▪ the date that follows the due date of the return by the lesser of one return period or six months. The cap will not apply where the shortfall penalty has been increased for obstruction under s 141K (see ¶14-150). Law: TAA s 141JAA  ¶14-150 Increased penalty for obstruction A shortfall penalty payable under any of ss 141AA–141EB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (which includes a promoter penalty (see ¶14-123) and a penalty relating to non-resident contractor payments (see ¶26-480)) may be increased by the Commissioner if the taxpayer obstructs the Commissioner in determining the correct tax position in respect of their tax liabilities. The level by which the  shortfall penalty may be increased for obstruction is 25%. See s 141K. Examples of obstruction include: ▪ refusing reasonable access to business premises ▪ destroying relevant records ▪ lying at an interview ▪ falsifying details in a statement of assets and liabilities (IR 110) ▪ deliberate delays to frustrate Inland Revenue (IR) inquiries. It is not an obstruction to exercise legal rights, contest an assessment, or maintain an opinion contrary to that of IR. The civil penalty for obstruction will not apply to agents and third parties. For example, when an agent obstructs an IR officer, the civil penalty for obstruction cannot be applied, as it must be the taxpayer who obstructs and there must be a resulting tax shortfall. If third parties or agents do obstruct, the criminal offence of obstruction may be used, resulting in prosecution and possible fines. See further at ¶14-280. Law: TAA s 141K  ¶14-155 Due date for shortfall and other penalties Section 142B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 deals with the due date for shortfall penalties. If the tax shortfall is an amount of unpaid tax, the shortfall penalty is due on the new date set by the Commissioner for payment of the unpaid tax under s 142A, or if no new date is set then on the date notified to the taxpayer by the Commissioner (which cannot be less than 30 days after the Commissioner issued the taxpayer with a notice of assessment for the penalty).  If the tax shortfall is not an amount of unpaid tax, the penalty is due on the date the Commissioner specifies. The following table sets out the due dates for payment of penalties, including shortfall penalties and repayments of excess refunds or credits of tax, along with the relevant sections: Section  Type of payment  Payment due date  142  late filing penalty  later of 30 days after notification and various dates as set out in legislation. See ¶14-040  142A  tax that is not a penalty (if at least 30 days after notice amount due on a due of assessment or date is increased) reassessment issued  142AB  new and increased assessments (other than default assessments)  at least 30 days after notice of assessment or reassessment issued  142B  shortfall penalties  at least 30 days after notice of assessment or reassessment issued  142C  payments by officers  at least 30 days after notice of assessment or reassessment issued  142D  repayment of excess refund or credit of tax  later of 30 days after the date of notification requiring payment or the date specified in the notice  142E  imputation penalty tax  20 June following the end of the imputation year (being 31 March)  142F  deferrable tax  30th day after the last day of the relevant period of deferral  142G  non-electronic filing penalty  30 days after the end of the month in which the employment income information, GST information or investment income information is required to be provided  142GB  penalty for member of large multinational group  at least 30 days after the date on which the notice of assessment was issued  A taxpayer who is charged a shortfall penalty will generally receive a new due date for paying both the penalty and the tax shortfall to which the penalty relates. The exception is if the taxpayer has failed to file a return. However, interest on the unpaid tax will still be charged from the original due date until the date on which the assessment identifying the shortfall is issued. Note that ss 142A and 142AB do not apply in all cases: see ss 142A(3) and 142AB(3). Note also that s 142A applies for the transitional period where the two IR software platforms coexist. The section will cease to apply following the transfer of all tax types from the FIRST system to the new START system. Section 142AB applies from the date a particular tax type is transferred to the START system, but will apply from 1 April 2023 at the latest. Law: TAA ss 142–142GB  ¶14-160 Payment of shortfall penalty using losses A person subject to a shortfall penalty may elect to use tax losses to pay the penalty. To achieve payment by the use of tax losses, the taxpayer must give the appropriate notice to the Commissioner before the due date for payment of the shortfall penalty.  Losses can only be used to offset against shortfall penalties on income tax shortfalls. For example, they are not available to be offset against shortfall penalties on PAYE, as this is not income tax to the employer. Once a tax loss has been applied in payment of a shortfall penalty, the loss is extinguished. It is not available to be offset against future income. A wholly-owned group of companies may also elect to apply a loss incurred by a company in the group in payment of a shortfall penalty imposed on any company in that group. See s IW 1(3). The value of the tax losses for payment purposes is calculated by multiplying each $1 of loss by a prescribed tax rate. The prescribed tax rate is the lowest marginal tax rate that would have applied to the taxpayer during the return period to which the relevant tax shortfall relates. See s IW 1(5). Example: AB Ltd has accumulated net losses of $122,850 at a time when the company is assessed for a shortfall penalty of $92,700. AB Ltd elects to utilise its losses in payment of the shortfall penalty. On the assumption that AB Ltd would have been subject to a 28% tax rate but for the losses, the shortfall penalty to pay would be calculated as follows: $ Shortfall penalty  92,700  Less value of losses ($122,850 × 28%)  34,398  Balance payable by AB Ltd  58,302  See also Inland Revenue’s standard practice statement SPS 16/04, “Payment of shortfall penalty using losses”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 11, November 2016 at 10. Law: IT07 ss IA 3(1), IW 1  ¶14-180 Remission of penalties and interest  Event or circumstance Under s 183A, the Commissioner may remit a penalty if satisfied that: ▪ the penalty arose as a result of an event or circumstance beyond the control of the taxpayer, and ▪ as a consequence of the event or circumstance the taxpayer has a reasonable justification or excuse for failing to comply, and ▪ the taxpayer corrected the failure to comply as soon as practicable. This applies to the following penalties: ▪ a late filing penalty ▪ a non-electronic filing penalty ▪ a late payment penalty ▪ any imputation penalty tax (imposed under s 140B) ▪ any Māori authority distribution penalty tax (imposed under s 140CB) ▪ a shortfall penalty under s 141AA for failing to make a deduction from a schedular payment to a non-resident contractor ▪ a civil penalty imposed under s 215 of the KiwiSaver Act 2006, and ▪ an employers’ withholding payment penalty under s 141ED. An “event or circumstance” includes an accident or disaster, or illness, or emotional or mental distress. Specifically excluded from this definition is an act or omission of an agent of the taxpayer. However, if the agent’s act or omission was caused by an event or circumstance beyond his or her control, such event being one that  could not have been anticipated and the effect of which could not have been avoided by compliance with accepted standards of business organisation and professional conduct, remission may be granted. See s 183A(2) and (3). Duty to collect highest net revenue Under s 183D, the Commissioner may also remit any of the penalties set out above, as well as use of money interest, if she is satisfied that the remission is consistent with her duty to collect over time the highest net revenue that is practicable. The Commissioner must have regard to the importance of the penalty, and interest, in promoting compliance, especially voluntary compliance, when applying s 183D. Generally, the Commissioner will grant remission of penalties if there has been a genuine oversight, a one-off situation or incorrect advice has been given by Inland Revenue (IR). As soon as practicable Remission will not be granted under s 183A or 183D for financial reasons. Requests for financial relief are dealt with under ss 176 and 177. See ¶2-119 on the financial relief provisions. Generally, the courts will be slow to interfere with the proper exercise by IR officers of statutory duties and discretions under s 183D and other provisions relating to tax recoveries: W v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,602. In that case, the High Court ruled that s 177 was in a different category because it involved a consideration of the individual taxpayer’s position. Remission applications will be considered only when the taxpayer has corrected the failure to comply as soon as practicable. No definition of the term “as soon as practicable” is provided for the remission provisions. However, some assistance may be found in the judgment of Judge Bathgate in Case G79 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,364. After referring to several authorities on the point, his Honour noted (at 1,368) that the word “practicable” might be interpreted as that which is capable of being done or accomplished with such resources as are available, according to the object or purpose of the legislation being considered.  It should be noted that there is no statutory right to challenge or object to any decision of the Commissioner to grant or decline remission under s 183A or 183D. However, where the Commissioner decides not to grant remission the taxpayer may request that the decision be reviewed by the Ombudsman or by way of judicial review. Remission of interest for emergency event A taxpayer affected by an emergency event may ask the Commissioner for a remission of use of money interest (s 183ABA). An emergency event is a situation that: ▪ is the result of any happening, whether natural or otherwise, including, without limitation, any explosion, earthquake, eruption, tsunami, land movement, flood, storm, tornado, cyclone, serious fire, leakage or spillage of any dangerous gas or substance, technological failure, infestation, plague, epidemic, failure of or disruption to an emergency service or a lifeline utility, or actual or imminent attack or warlike act ▪ causes or may cause loss of life or injury or illness or distress or in any way endangers the safety of the public or property in New Zealand or any part of New Zealand, and ▪ is declared by Order in Council to be an emergency event in relation to a class or classes of persons. The definition is based on the definition of an emergency in s 4 of the Civil Defence Emergency Management Act 2002. A remission request need not be in writing. It may be made by a taxpayer who has incurred an interest liability because the emergency event physically prevented the taxpayer from paying the underlying tax by the due date. The taxpayer must be a member of the class of persons described in the Order in Council proclaiming the emergency event. There are further restrictions. Remission is permitted only if:  ▪ the taxpayer has sought relief, and paid the underlying tax, as soon as practicable, and ▪ the Commissioner is satisfied that remission is equitable. In effect, a request can be made once all necessary tax returns have been filed and outstanding tax has been paid. An Order in Council for an emergency event may relate to events that have already occurred. Any such Order expires (unless renewed) at the end of the period specified in the Order or, if there is no such period, the end of six months after the Order is promulgated. Canterbury earthquakes The 4 September 2010 and 22 February 2011 earthquakes in Christchurch are an example of a situation classified as an emergency event entitling taxpayers to seek remission. Safety requirements meant that business owners were barred from accessing their premises for many weeks. Relief for these taxpayers was provided by the Tax Administration (Emergency Event — Canterbury Earthquake) Order 2010 (SR 2010/307). Hurunui/Kaikoura earthquakes The Hurunui/Kaikoura earthquakes on 14 November 2016 (and aftershocks) were also declared an emergency event on 21 November 2016 by the Tax Administration (Hurunui/Kaikoura Earthquakes) Order 2016. Under the Order, taxpayers could ask the Commissioner to remit interest. Remission of interest for taxpayers affected by COVID-19 Payment not made on time As part of the Coalition Government’s package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus, s 183ABAB was introduced to provide for the remission of use of money interest for businesses and individuals adversely affected by COVID-19. Under the provision, the Commissioner may remit interest if a taxpayer’s ability to make a tax payment on time is significantly  adversely affected by COVID-19. This includes both where a taxpayer has been physically unable to make a payment on time (eg because they have been quarantined), and where a taxpayer lacks the financial means to make a payment on time because of the economic impacts of COVID-19. The Commissioner’s discretion to remit interest only applies to interest that has accrued on payments due on or after 14 February 2020. Note that the provision does not apply where the requirement to make the payment arises from an election under s IZ 8 to carry back losses. Thus, where use of money interest applies because of an overestimate of an amount of loss carry-back, the taxpayer cannot use s 183ABAB to claim a remission of the interest. The taxpayer must ask the Commissioner to remit the interest and the Commissioner must be satisfied that the taxpayer asked for the relief as soon as practicable and made payment of the tax as soon as practicable. The interest will not be remitted until the tax payment has been made. Currently, the Commissioner’s ability to remit interest will only apply until 25 March 2022 (being 24 months from the enactment of the provision). However, this period may be extended by an Order in Council made on the recommendation of the Minister of Revenue if the Minister is satisfied the ability of taxpayers to pay tax on time is likely to continue to be significantly adversely affected by COVID-19 beyond the expiry of the initial 24-month period. Inland Revenue has released the following guidance on the new provision (see https://www.ird.govt.nz/covid-19/tax-relief/uomi): “It is the Commissioner’s view that the taxpayer has been significantly affected by COVID-19 financially where the customer’s income or revenue has reduced as a consequence of COVID-19 and that as a result of that reduction in income or revenue is unable to pay their taxes in full and on time. “As soon as practicable” will be determined on the facts of each case.  For guidance, the Commissioner considers the term means that so long as the taxpayer applies for the relief at the earliest opportunity and agrees to an arrangement that will see the outstanding tax paid at the earliest opportunity, or will be paid over the most reasonable period given the taxpayer’s specific circumstances, the test will have been met. Those customers who require further assistance at a later date, such as having to renegotiate the terms of an arrangement, should contact us at the earliest opportunity after determining they will have difficulty in paying the tax as agreed. So long as the taxpayer completes an arrangement (which may have been amended at the taxpayer’s request during the period of the arrangement), the Commissioner will accept that by entering into and completing that arrangement, the test for “as soon as practicable” in respect of paying the tax will have been met. Interest and penalties will continue to accrue for those taxpayers who enter into arrangements. However, when the arrangement is completed and we have already established the taxpayer meets the criteria for remission, that interest will be automatically cancelled without the need for the taxpayer to apply to have it remitted. The interest will be charged on those taxpayers who do not complete an arrangement from the time they stop complying with the arrangement. Information to be provided when requesting relief We will be trying to minimise the information we would ask to be provided during these unusual times. By continuing to file GST and other returns we will have a lot of the information we would normally ask to be provided. However, customers should be able to provide, if asked, at least three months bank statements and credit card statements; any management accounting information; a list of aged creditors and debtors. We will not ask for that information in every case, but the information should be available if we do ask for it. For businesses, we’ll be looking to understand the taxpayer’s plan to sustain their business. We  understand you might not be able to get all this information at this time given the COVID-19 lockdown. We will work with you based on what you know and are able to access at this time and will continue to do so as more information becomes available.” Terminal tax for 2020–21 tax year Section 183ABAB covers the situation where a taxpayer is charged interest immediately on a missed payment. However, it does not cover the situation where interest is charged retrospectively, as the interest is charged on the basis of unpaid tax at the instalment dates and not in respect of a ‘payment’ that could not be made. For this reason, s 183ABAC was introduced with effect from 7 August 2020. Section 183ABAC provides for the Commissioner to remit interest accrued on an amount of terminal tax payable for the 2020–21 tax year in certain circumstances. The provision applies to taxpayers liable to pay provisional tax for the 2020–21 tax year if: ▪ the taxpayer, for the 2020–21 year □ makes an estimate on or before their last instalment date □ uses the standard method and elects to pay expected residual income tax (RIT) less tax paid for their final instalment, or □ would be a safe harbour taxpayer but did not pay their instalments in full, and ▪ the taxpayer’s RIT for the 2020–21 tax year is less than $1 million, and ▪ the taxpayer failed to pay the relevant provisional tax on their instalment dates because their ability to reasonably accurate forecast their RIT was significantly adversely affected by COVID-19.  The taxpayer may ask the Commissioner to remit interest accrued between 31 March 2020 and the taxpayer’s terminal tax date for the 2020–21 tax year. The Commissioner may remit that interest provided the Commissioner is satisfied the taxpayer asked for relief as soon as practicable and has paid their terminal tax for the 2020– 21 tax year. Note that, as for s 183ABAB, s 183ABAC does not apply where the requirement to pay the amount arises from an election under s IZ 8 to carry back losses. In addition, s 183ABAC does not limit s 183ABAB. Māori authorities Section 181B provides that Māori authority distribution penalty tax must be remitted to the extent that the Commissioner is satisfied that: ▪ a debit entry in the Māori authority credit account, made because a Māori authority credit was determined to be the subject of an arrangement to secure a tax advantage, is reversed under s OK 9 ▪ liability for the penalty tax arose because, before the end of the tax year, a refund of a Māori authority distribution was sent but not received by the authority, or the Māori authority did not know it had been received, or ▪ the Māori authority credit account was debited with an amount of overpaid income tax applied by the Commissioner towards an amount payable under the Inland Revenue Acts (excluding an income tax liability or provisional tax) and the Māori authority did not become aware of the debit in sufficient time to allow for it to be removed before the end of the year. If the Commissioner remits Māori authority distribution penalty tax under s 181B, any late payment penalty imposed in relation to that tax or the further income tax that gave rise to the Māori authority distribution penalty tax must also be remitted.  Māori authority distribution penalty tax may also be remitted under s 183A. Under s 181D, the Commissioner must remit interest or a late payment penalty relating to further income tax paid or payable by a Māori authority and to which s OK 23 or OK 24 of the Income Tax Act 2007 applies (see ¶24-327). The remitted amount is the extent that the amount of further income tax charged for the tax year is equal to or less than the amount of unpaid income tax. Commissioner’s policy on remission of penalties and interest Standard practice statement, SPS 18/04, “Options for relief from tax debt” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 9, October 2018 at 37), summarises the Commissioner’s practice when considering options for removing or deferring the obligation to pay tax, interest and/or penalties and discusses remission under ss 183A, 183ABA and 183D. The statement considers the legislative criteria for the application of each of the provisions, as discussed above. In relation to remission under s 183A, the statement makes the following points: ▪ whether there is reasonable justification is determined objectively ▪ the event or circumstance relied on must be identified ▪ it must be determined whether the event or circumstance was beyond the taxpayer’s control, and ▪ consideration must then be given to whether that event or circumstance provided the taxpayer with reasonable justification. The statement also sets out a number of more general factors the Commissioner may consider and specifies which factors are relevant for each of ss 183A, 183ABA and 183D. The Commissioner will consider the following factors for all three provisions: ▪ the integrity of the tax system  ▪ the importance of promoting compliance, and ▪ the taxpayer’s reasons for their failure to pay. With regard to an event or circumstance (s 183A) and the duty to collect the highest revenue over time (s 183D), the Commissioner will also consider the following factors: ▪ the taxpayer’s compliance history, and ▪ the taxpayer’s co-operation and negotiating stance, and the speed with which the taxpayer provided requested information, as well as the quality of that information. When considering her duty to collect the highest revenue over time, the Commissioner will also consider whether any steps have been, or will be, taken by the taxpayer to prevent the situation from recurring in the future. Automatic cancellation of penalties and remission of interest There are three provisions under the Tax Administration Act 1994 for automatic cancellation of penalties and remission of interest. These are as follows: ▪ Cancellation of late payment penalties under an instalment arrangement entered into before 1 April 2002. See s 183AB. ▪ If the underlying tax is remitted, the use of money interest is also remitted. See s 183E and ¶22-355. ▪ Income tax or further income tax paid by a Māori authority under s 181D. See above. Cancellation of interest Interest on the tax assessed is cancelled under s 183C(1) where the Commissioner issues a notice of assessment and the taxpayer pays the underlying tax owing, together with any interest payable for the period before the date of notice, by the due date in the notice.  Where a notice of assessment is issued before the original due date for the payment of the tax, and the tax assessed — together with any interest payable up to the date of issue of the assessment — is paid within 30 days of the date of issue, the interest for the period from the day after the date of issue of the assessment and the date of payment (or due date of the tax if earlier) will be cancelled. See s 183C(3). Example 1: Carol files her 2016 income tax return on 4 July 2016. She receives an assessment dated 15 August 2016 on 20 August 2016. The assessment shows 2016 terminal tax payable of $8,000 plus interest (calculated up to 15 August 2016) of $500. If Carol pays $8,500 to IR on or before 14 September 2016 (ie within 30 days of 15 August 2016), the interest payable for the period from 16 August 2016 to 14 September 2016 will be cancelled.  Where a statement of account is issued after the original due date for the payment of the tax, and the tax referred to in the statement together with any interest payable up to that date is paid within 30 days of the date of issue of the statement (or due date of the tax if earlier), the interest for the period from the day after the date of issue of the statement to the day on which payment is made will be cancelled. See s 183C(4). Example 2: Jerry receives a statement of account dated 15 March 2016 for 2015 terminal tax (payable on 7 February 2016) on 20 March 2016. The statement of account shows $5,000 of 2015 terminal tax, late payment penalties, and interest (calculated up to 15 March 2016). If Jerry pays $5,000 to IR on or before 14 April 2016 (ie within 30 days of 15 March 2016), the interest payable in respect of the period from 16 March 2016 to 14 April 2016 will be cancelled.  Note that a modified cancellation of interest rule is contained in s 183C(4B)–(4E) to deal with the situation where taxpayers pay what is shown on the second statement notwithstanding the portion of interest charged between the dates of the two statements is  ultimately cancelled (leaving small credit balances in accounts). Inland Revenue is investigating better ways to deal with this in its new START computer system to avoid overpayment issues, but a temporary solution has been provided until all taxes are migrated to START and the statement process can be standardised across all tax types. If both a notice of assessment and a statement of account are issued and the grace periods overlap, a taxpayer is eligible for the cancellation of debit interest for the period beginning the day after the notice of assessment is issued and ending on the date of payment, if the payment of tax (and interest up to the date of assessment) is made within 30 days of the issue of the notice of assessment. See s 183C(5). Time when cancellation takes effect If penalties or interest have been cancelled by the Commissioner, the time at which the cancellation takes effect is the time at which the tax liability or obligation arose. Interest or civil penalties can never be payable on a tax liability or obligation that is cancelled. See s 183I. Refunds by Commissioner The remitted or cancelled amount of interest or civil penalty must either be refunded to the taxpayer or applied to another part of the taxpayer’s tax liability. See s 183G. Law: TAA ss 181B–181D, 183AA–183I  ¶14-190 Standard of proof and onus of proof — civil proceedings The standard of proof in civil proceedings relating to the imposition of penalties is the “balance of probabilities”. The onus of proof in civil proceedings: ▪ relating to evasion or a similar act to which s 141E of the Tax Administration Act 1994 applies, or to obstruction, rests with the  Commissioner, or ▪ relating to any other matter or thing, rests with the taxpayer. Law: TAA s 149A(1), (2)  ¶14-195 Recovery of civil penalties Under s 156A, for the purpose of recovering unpaid civil penalties, the civil penalty is deemed to be a tax of the same type as the tax: ▪ for which the penalty is imposed, or ▪ if the penalty is a late filing penalty, for which the tax return is to be provided, or ▪ if the penalty is a non-electronic filing penalty, for which the return is provided. A civil penalty is recoverable from a taxpayer at any time after it has become payable, whether or not the taxpayer has been convicted of an offence in relation to the act, omission or matter that gave rise to the liability for the penalty. See s 156A(3). In accordance with the provisions set out in s 174AA the Commissioner has discretion to refrain from collecting civil penalties of $20 or less. The Commissioner may recover unpaid late filing penalties, late payment penalties and shortfall penalties relating to PAYE from a PAYE intermediary. See further at ¶3-485. Law: TAA s 156A  INTEREST ¶14-200 Interest regime  ▸Note: As part of the Coalition Government’s package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus, businesses and individuals who are adversely affected by COVID-19 and who can demonstrate the inability to pay tax by the due date may be eligible for a use of money interest write-off. See ¶14-180. The interest regime aims to compensate for the loss of use of money for taxpayers when they have overpaid their tax and for the Commissioner when tax is underpaid. The interest regime is expressly stated not to be a penalty. Any intention to defer tax payments and incur interest or overpay tax is therefore essentially a financing decision. Use of money interest generally applies to all tax obligations and liabilities under the Income Tax Act 2007 (IT07), Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), Stamp and Cheque Duties Act 1971, Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act), Gaming Duties Act 1971, Estate and Gift Duties Act 1968, KiwiSaver Act 2006, Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (excluding a repayment obligation), Accident Compensation Act 2001 and the Child Support Act 1991 (excluding financial support). Certain persons are excluded from the interest regime. These are: ▪ student loan borrowers with a repayment obligation ▪ a liable person in relation to child support ▪ an employer in relation to amounts of compulsory employer contributions required under Pt 3 of the KiwiSaver Act, and ▪ a person who is not an employer who fails to comply with one of the Commissioner’s attachment notices. Interest is neither payable nor receivable by the taxpayer where the underlying tax is less than $100. See s 183F of the TAA. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to bring both compulsory  and voluntary KiwiSaver employer contributions within the use of money interest regime. The amendment is intended to apply from 1 April 2021. Overpaid tax Use of money interest on overpayments of tax generally starts on the later of: ▪ the day after the later of the original due date for payment of tax and the date the payment is made ▪ if a tax return must be filed, the day after the day on which the return is filed ▪ the date on which a pre-populated account is finalised or the Commissioner provides a default assessment, if Pt 3, subpart 3B of the TAA applies ▪ for a provisional taxpayer, other than one whose residual income tax for a year is payable in one instalment on their terminal tax date (under s 120KE(1) or (3)), the first day of the income year, and ▪ for a provisional taxpayer subject to s 120KE(6) (ie who changes from the GST ratio method of calculation), the later of: □ the day after the date the taxpayer stops using a GST ratio (as set out in s RC 18(3) of the IT07), and □ the day after the taxpayer’s last ratio instalment date. Goods and services tax The date use of money interest starts for GST overpayments is governed by the ordinary rules, discussed above. The special rules below apply to use of money interest on GST refunds (under s 19C(8) or 20(5) of the GST Act). In such cases interest will start on the later of: ▪ the day after the earlier of:  □ the 10th working day after provision of the return for the return period relating to the refund, and □ the original due date for payment of the output tax in relation to the return period, and ▪ the day after the day upon which the return was provided. Note that use of money interest does not apply to GST refunds to non-residents registered under s 54B of the GST Act. Fringe benefit tax Special rules also apply for use of money interest on overpaid FBT for the final quarter of an income year. In such cases, interest will start on the 31 May following the end of the final quarter or the date on which the FBT return is filed, whichever is the later. For example, an FBT return for the quarter ended 31 March 2019 is filed on 20 June 2019. The FBT return shows a refund due of $200. Use of money interest is calculated on the refund from 20 June 2019. If the return had been filed on 20 May 2019, use of money interest would be calculated on the refund from 31 May 2019. Deposits to a tax pooling account Tax paid as a deposit to a tax pooling account is assigned a specific commencement date. The date interest starts is the date the deposit is made. Should the Commissioner refund the deposit no interest start date exists. For this purpose, tax paid is an amount credited to an intermediary’s tax pooling account or an amount credited or transferred to a taxpayer’s account from a tax pooling account. See s RP 18 of the IT07 and ¶22-365. Unpaid tax Use of money interest on unpaid tax or underpayments of tax: ▪ usually starts on the day after the original due date for the tax payment, or ▪ for provisional taxpayers subject to s 120KE(7) (ie who changes from the GST ratio method of calculation), the day after  whichever dates of instalments B, D and F for their income year occur 30 days after their last ratio instalment date. An exception to this rule applies where the Commissioner refunds or applies overpaid tax which should have been kept to satisfy a taxpayer’s tax liability on a due date. In such an instance, interest starts on the day after the day on which the Commissioner refunds or applies the overpaid tax, unless the taxpayer is an individual who derives only reportable income for an income year. In the latter case, interest starts on the day after the due date for payment of the tax. If a new due date has been set, interest starts on the day after the original due date. See s 120C. Interest is charged, on a non-compounding basis, on the daily difference between the amount of tax paid and the amount of tax assessed (including any accumulated penalties). See s 120E. Any payment towards reducing the tax liability is first applied to any interest owing on that tax liability before reducing the underlying tax liability itself. See s 120F. Assessability, deductibility, withholding tax Interest paid on overpayments is assessable (see ¶5-281) and subject to non-resident withholding tax provisions. Interest charged on underpayments is deductible under s DB 3B of the IT07. For commentary on the allocation of interest income paid by the Commissioner and the deduction of interest paid to the Commissioner, refer to ¶5-281 and ¶10-650, respectively. Paying rates The taxpayer’s paying rate and the Commissioner’s paying rate are set out in the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Regulations 1998 as amended from time to time. Different paying rates have been in force for various periods as set out at ¶50-083. Interest calculation formula Interest payable by the taxpayer or the Commissioner is calculated in accordance with a formula for each day of the interest period. The formula is as follows:  t × r ÷ 365 where: t is the unpaid tax or overpaid tax on which the interest is payable, and r is the taxpayer’s paying rate or the Commissioner’s paying rate on the day in question. The formula is applied for each day of the interest period. Under that approach the amount of interest payable for an interest period becomes the aggregate of the amounts calculated under the formula for each day in the interest period. The amount of interest outstanding at any time in the interest period would be the sum of those amounts less any interest paid. Example: For the income year ended 31 March 2XX2 the position concerning provisional tax payments for JRE Ltd was as follows: Provisional tax due Tax payment made $  $  7 July 2XX1  33,000  15,000  7 November 2XX1  33,000  15,000  7 March 2XX2  33,000  10,000  99,000  40,000  Tax of $59,000 was paid on 7 February 2XX3. For the 2XX1–X2 income tax year the taxpayer’s paying rate was 8.91% pa. Interest would be payable by JRE Ltd on the following basis: ▪ 8 July 2XX1 to 7 November 2XX1 (123 days) on $18,000 ▪ 8 November 2XX1 to 7 March 2XX2 (120 days) on $36,000 ▪ 8 March 2XX2 to 7 February 2XX3 (337 days) on $59,000. The calculations for interest on unpaid tax comprising provisional tax would be as follows: $  18,000 × 8.91%  ×  123 =  540.45  ×  120 =  1,054.55  ×  337 =  4,853.63  365 36,000 × 8.91% 365 59,000 × 8.91% 365  $6,448.63  Interest rate setting process The Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 prescribe a process for determination of the taxpayer’s paying rate and the Commissioner’s paying rate applicable to interest periods. The Regulations require that: ▪ the taxpayer’s paying rate will be set at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand floating first mortgage new customer housing rate plus 250 basis points, and ▪ the Commissioner’s paying rate shall be set at the higher of 0% and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand 90-day bank bill rate series less 100 basis points. Provisional tax and transfers of overpaid tax The use of money interest rules for payments of provisional tax are discussed at ¶22-350–¶22-360. For use of money interest and transfers of overpaid tax, see ¶22-140 and ¶22-352. Tax in dispute For commentary on use of money interest payable on tax in dispute, see ¶4-230. Reliance on Commissioner’s official opinions  Where a taxpayer is liable to pay interest on unpaid tax, the taxpayer is not liable to pay interest to the extent that it arises due to reliance on a Commissioner’s official opinion (see ¶14-115) given on or after 7 September 2010. See s 120W. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 69–70. Law: TAA Pt 7, ss 120A, 120B, 120C, 120D, 120E, 120U, 120W, 183F  CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND OFFENCES ¶14-230 Criminal penalties Various criminal offences are contained in the Tax Administration Act 1994 in ss 143–148. The offences carry substantial fines and, in some cases, a term of imprisonment. Criminal penalties are split into the broad categories of absolute liability offences and knowledge offences. The majority of the offences have been placed in three main categories: ▪ absolute liability offences for not keeping or providing required information ▪ offences for knowingly failing to comply with a tax obligation, and ▪ evasion offences. There are also penalties for the following: Offences relating to court orders  ¶14-270  Offences in relation to inquiries  ¶14-275  Obstruction  ¶14-280  Aiding and abetting  ¶14-285  Offences of employers and officers ¶14-295 Breach of secrecy  ¶14-300  Criminal penalties can only be imposed by a court after a successful prosecution by Inland Revenue (IR). IR can pursue a criminal prosecution under the provisions discussed below in addition to a civil penalty, such as a late payment penalty. However, s 149(5) states that if a shortfall penalty has been imposed on a taxpayer for taking an incorrect tax position, the Commissioner may not subsequently prosecute the taxpayer for taking the incorrect tax position. Law: TAA s 149  ¶14-240 Absolute liability offences An absolute liability offence is one where failure to do the specified action is sufficient proof that an offence has occurred, so proof of taxpayer knowledge or intent is irrelevant. “Absolute liability offences” under s 143 are committed when a person: ▪ does not keep the documents required to be kept by a tax law, or ▪ fails to register with a foreign government agency as required under Pt 11B (Foreign account information-sharing agreements), or ▪ does not provide information (including tax returns and tax forms) to the Commissioner or any other person when required to do so by a tax law, or ▪ does not provide a tax invoice when required to do so under the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act), or ▪ does not apply for registration when required to do so under the GST Act. The definition of “document” as used in s 143(1)(a) is intended to cover the medium on which information is stored, the information  itself and any device associated with the medium which allows the information to be communicated. The term “tax return,” as used in s 143, includes final accounts under Pt 3, subpart 3B. Defences A person cannot be convicted of an offence of not providing information (other than tax returns and tax forms) under this provision if the person proves that: ▪ the person did not have the information in his or her knowledge, possession or control, and ▪ that information was not in the knowledge, possession or control of a non-resident controlled by the person under s 17E(1). A person cannot be convicted of an offence for failing to register with a foreign government agency if the relevant failure to register occurred through no fault of the person. A person cannot be convicted of an offence under this section for failing to comply with a requirement under the Common Reporting Standard. This is because ss 142H and 142I provide for absolute liability offences in those circumstances: see ¶14-048. A resident foreign trustee cannot be convicted of an offence under s 143(1)(a) for failing to keep the documents required by s 22 or under s 143(1)(b) for not disclosing information required to be disclosed under s 59B, if the trustee can prove that: ▪ he or she did not know of the requirements of s 22 or 59B (as applicable), and/or ▪ another resident foreign trustee has been appointed as agent (in accordance with either s 22(2C) or 59B(7) as applicable) to meet those requirements and the Commissioner has been notified of the appointment. Penalty  Under s 143(3), the penalty for an absolute liability offence is a fine not exceeding: ▪ $4,000 for the first offence ▪ $8,000 for the second offence, and ▪ $12,000 for any subsequent offence. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 17E(1), 143  ¶14-250 Knowledge offences A person may be convicted for a number of offences for knowingly breaching a tax obligation. A knowledge offence is committed where a person: ▪ knowingly does not keep the documents required to be kept by a tax law, or ▪ knowingly fails to register with a foreign government agency as required by Pt 11B (Foreign account information-sharing agreements), or ▪ knowingly fails to provide information, including a selfcertification, to another person when required to do so under Pt 11B (Foreign account information-sharing agreements), or ▪ knowingly does not provide information (including tax returns and tax forms) to the Commissioner or any other person when required to do so by a tax law, or ▪ knowingly provides altered, false, incomplete, or misleading information (including tax returns and tax forms) to the Commissioner or any other person in respect of a tax law or a matter or thing relating to a tax law, or ▪ knowingly applies or permits the application of the amount of a deduction or withholding of tax made or deemed made under a  tax law for any purpose other than in payment to the Commissioner, or ▪ knowingly does not make a deduction or withholding of tax required to be made by a tax law, or ▪ knowingly issues two tax invoices (as defined in the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act)) in respect of the same taxable supply ▪ knowingly does not issue a receipt relating to a supply of distantly taxable goods as required by s 24BAB(3) of the GST Act ▪ knowingly does not provide information relating to a supply of distantly taxable goods as required by s 24BAC of the GST Act ▪ for a recipient of a supply of remote services or, with effect from 23 March 2020, distantly taxable goods from a non-resident supplier, and to avoid the payment of GST, knowingly provides altered, false or misleading information relating to their New Zealand residence or their status as a registered person, or ▪ with effect from 23 March 2020, for an underlying supplier of a supply of distantly taxable goods or remote services through a marketplace, knowingly provides altered, false or misleading information relating to the country or territory in which they are resident. The definition of “document”, as used in s 143A(1)(a), is intended to cover the medium on which information is stored, the information itself and any device associated with the medium which allows the information to be communicated. The term “tax return”, as used in s 143A, includes final accounts under Pt 3, subpart 3B. Penalty The penalty for commission of a knowledge offence is:  ▪ a maximum fine of $25,000 for the first offence, and ▪ a maximum fine of $50,000 for any subsequent offence. However, under s 143A(8), the penalty for knowingly not accounting to the Commissioner for a deduction or withholding payment made is imprisonment for up to five years and/or a fine of up to $50,000. Note that this increased penalty does not apply to offences relating to deductions made under attachment notices. The fine for a person who knowingly does not provide information as required, or knowingly provides altered, false, incomplete or misleading information in relation to the disclosure of trust particulars (s 59 of the TAA) or disclosure of an interest in a foreign company or a foreign investment fund (s 61 of the TAA), is a maximum of $50,000. See s 143A(9). Defences No conviction is possible for the offence of knowingly failing to provide information to a person when required to do so under Pt 11B (Foreign account information-sharing agreements) or for knowingly not providing information to the Commissioner (other than tax returns and tax forms) if the person proves that: ▪ the person did not have the information in his or her knowledge, possession or control, and ▪ that information was not in the knowledge, possession or control of a non-resident controlled by the person under s 17E(1) of the TAA. See s 143A(2). A taxpayer will not be convicted for knowingly applying or permitting to be applied an amount of withholding or a tax deduction for another purpose if the person satisfies the court that the withholding or deduction has been accounted for and the failure to account for it on time was because of illness, accident, or other cause beyond the taxpayer’s control. See s 143A(4).  Law: TAA s 143A  ¶14-260 Offence of evasion The offence of evasion is committed where a person: ▪ knowingly does not keep the documents required to be kept by a tax law, or ▪ knowingly does not provide information (including tax returns and tax forms) to the Commissioner or any other person when required to do so by a tax law, or ▪ knowingly provides altered, false, incomplete, or misleading information (including tax returns and tax forms) to the Commissioner or any other person in respect of a tax law or a matter or thing relating to a tax law, or ▪ knowingly does not make a deduction or withholding of tax required to be made by a tax law, or ▪ pretends to be another person for any purpose or reason relating to a tax law and does so: ▪ intending to evade the assessment or payment of tax by the person or any other person under a tax law, or ▪ to obtain a refund or payment of tax in the knowledge that the person is not lawfully entitled to the refund or payment under a tax law, or ▪ to enable another person to obtain a refund or payment of tax in the knowledge that the other person is not lawfully entitled to the refund or payment under a tax law. The definition of “document”, as used in s 143B(1)(a), is intended to cover the medium on which information is stored, the information  itself and any device associated with the medium which allows the information to be communicated. The term “tax return” includes final accounts under Pt 3, subpart 3B. Evasion of assessment or payment A person who evades or attempts to evade the assessment or payment of tax by that person or another person is also guilty of evasion. Essentially what this means is that if the act or failure to act does not come within the offences listed in s 143B(1)(a)–(e), then prosecution action can be taken under s 143B(2). Prosecution Under s 149(5), if a shortfall penalty has been imposed on a taxpayer for taking an incorrect tax position, Inland Revenue may not subsequently prosecute the taxpayer for taking the incorrect tax position. Under s 149(4) a shortfall penalty may be imposed after a prosecution, whether or not the prosecution is successful. If prosecution action for evasion is unsuccessful, a shortfall penalty can still be imposed for evasion or a similar act, because the standard of proof is the “balance of probabilities”, even though the onus of proof still rests with the Commissioner. However, where the prosecution was unsuccessful this will be taken into consideration. If it was dismissed for a technical reason, then a shortfall penalty may still apply. In contrast, where the evidence before the court was inadequate then it will be unlikely a shortfall penalty can be applied. Penalties The penalties for evasion are: ▪ imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or ▪ a fine not exceeding $50,000, or ▪ both. Law: TAA s 143B  ¶14-270 Offences relating to court orders A person who fails to comply with the terms of a court order made under s 17H commits an offence. Anyone who is convicted of such an offence is liable for up to three months imprisonment or a fine of up to $1,000 for each offence. Law: TAA s 143G  ¶14-275 Offences in relation to inquiries A person commits an offence if that person is: ▪ summoned under s 17J of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and refuses or wilfully neglects to appear before the District Court Judge or to take oath as a witness before the District Court Judge, or ▪ sworn as a witness at an inquiry under s 17J and refuses or wilfully neglects to answer any question put to him or her touching upon the subject matter of the inquiry, or ▪ required to give evidence under s 17I and refuses or wilfully neglects to appear before the Commissioner or authorised officer or to take an oath as witness before the Commissioner or authorised officer, or ▪ sworn as a witness at an inquiry under s 17I and refuses or wilfully neglects to: □ answer any question put to him or her touching upon the subject matter of the inquiry, or □ produce to the Commissioner or authorised officer a document required to be produced under s 17I(2). Any person who is convicted of an offence under s 143F(1) is liable: ▪ for the first offence — to a fine not exceeding $2,000 and/or $50 for each day of default  ▪ for the second offence — to a fine not exceeding $4,000 and/or $100 for each day of default ▪ for each subsequent offence — to a fine not exceeding $6,000 and/or $150 for each day of default. Law: TAA s 143F  ¶14-280 Offence of obstruction An offence is committed by any person who obstructs the Commissioner or an Inland Revenue (IR) officer acting in the lawful discharge of the duties or in the exercise of the Commissioner’s or officer’s powers under a tax law. The penalty for this offence is a maximum fine of $25,000 for the first offence and $50,000 for subsequent offences. See, for example, Highfield v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,609. For discussion on shortfall penalties that may be increased due to obstruction by the taxpayer, see ¶14-150. Law: TAA s 143H  ¶14-285 Offence of aiding or abetting A person who aids, abets, incites, or conspires with another person to commit an offence also commits an offence and is liable to the same fine and/or term of imprisonment as the principal offender. This could result in a maximum penalty of five years’ imprisonment. Set out below are a few general points regarding aiding and abetting. ▪ There must be an intention to aid and abet. A passive bystander would therefore be excluded from the definition. ▪ A person committing the offence of aiding and abetting does not need to know that he or she is being assisted by another party.  ▪ The aider and abettor must have actual knowledge of the essential facts that make up the offence to which he or she is allegedly a party. ▪ The required knowledge may be inferred by a court from consideration of all the relevant circumstances. ▪ A secondary party to an offence may be charged with aiding and abetting only if the act relied on occurred before or at the same time as the time of the offence. For further discussion see CCH, A Practical Guide to Tax Penalties in New Zealand, ¶601. Also see R v Gill (1999) 19 NZTC 15,526 (CA) and Evans v C of IR (2009) 24 NZTC 23,545 (CA). Law: TAA s 148  ¶14-290 Penalties for offences for which no specific penalty is imposed A person who is convicted of an offence against the Tax Administration Act 1994 or any other Inland Revenue Act for which no specific penalty is prescribed is liable to: ▪ a maximum fine of $15,000 if it is the first time the person is convicted of that type of offence, and ▪ a maximum fine of $25,000 on every subsequent conviction for an offence of the same type. Law: TAA s 145  ¶14-295 Offences of employees and officers Under s 147 of the Tax Administration Act 1994, an employee, agent or officer of a body corporate commits an offence if: ▪ the body corporate commits an offence (the principal offence), and  ▪ the principal offence: □ was caused by an act or omission of the employee, agent or officer, or through knowledge attributable to him or her, or □ is evasion committed by the employee, agent or officer. An employee or officer of a body corporate includes anyone who is responsible for undertaking an action on the body corporate’s behalf. An employee, agent or officer who does or carries out an act or omission, or has the knowledge or intent (as described above), is liable on conviction for the same maximum fine and/or term of imprisonment that applies for committing the principal offence. Law: TAA s 147  ¶14-300 Offences for disclosure of sensitive revenue information A number of offences are provided in ss 143C, 143D and 143E of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) in relation to disclosure of sensitive revenue information by Inland Revenue (IR) officers and other people who might have access to confidential information. An IR officer who fails to keep confidential all sensitive revenue information or discloses information knowing that it may adversely affect the integrity of the tax system or prejudice the maintenance of the law commits an offence and is liable under s 143C to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding $15,000 or both. Similar penalties apply to persons other than IR officers who knowingly fail to complete a certificate of confidentiality before having access to sensitive revenue information or who complete the certificate but nevertheless knowingly disclose the information: s 143D. Certain employers, principals, directors, secretaries, managers, principal officers, etc, will also commit an offence and be liable for the same penalties if they disclose information that comes to their knowledge through the agency of the Commissioner: s  143EB. In addition, allowing employees to access revenue information before signing a confidentiality certificate will mean certain employers, directors, etc commit an offence and will be liable under s 143E for a fine not exceeding $15,000. Law: TAA ss 143C–143EB  ¶14-320 Proceedings for offences Matters relating to the proceedings for an offence, the filing of a charging document, including time limits, and evidence are set out in ss 149B–152 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Charging document may charge several offences A charging document may charge a defendant with more than one offence against the TAA, or against the provisions of any former Act, if those offences arise from the same set of facts, or are part of a series of offences of the same or a similar character. In this situation, all of the charges will generally be heard together. See s 150 of the TAA. Charging document may be filed within 10 years for income tax and GST offences A charging document for offences may be filed within 10 years after the termination of the year in which the offence was committed. This will apply where the offence against the TAA relates to a tax law that is a provision of the Income Tax Act 2007 or the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 or to an obligation that exists in relation to either of those Acts. See s 150A(1)–(2) of the TAA. Evidence in proceeding for failure to furnish returns or information A signed certificate from the Commissioner stating that the tax return, information and/or documents have not been received within the required time frame will be sufficient evidence, for the purpose of the proceeding, that the person has refused or failed to provide the return, information and/or documents.  Law: TAA ss 149B–152  ¶14-330 Deduction of tax from payments due to defaulters The Commissioner may issue a notice requiring a person who owes money to a defaulting taxpayer to pay the funds to the Commissioner instead. This procedure, which is authorised by s 157 of the Tax Administration Act 1994, applies in the case of unpaid income tax, use of money interest or a civil penalty. Interest accruing on the unpaid amount after the deduction notice is issued may also be demanded. Under s 157A, a person who is not an employer and who has received a notice requiring deductions to be made commits an offence by not complying with the notice. Interest and civil penalties, however, are not payable. The most common occasion on which the Commissioner exercises this power is in respect of payments of salary or wages to employees who have an unpaid tax liability. Of course, the Commissioner’s powers are not confined to that situation. The Commissioner may issue s 157 notices to banks, building societies, legal practitioners or others who may be holding funds belonging to or due to become payable to the taxpayer. See further at ¶2-190. Law: TAA ss 157, 157A  ¶14-360 Standard of proof and onus of proof — criminal proceedings The standard of proof in criminal proceedings relating to the imposition of penalties is “beyond reasonable doubt”. The onus of proof in criminal proceedings rests with the Commissioner. Law: TAA s 149A(3), (4)  RESIDENT WITHHOLDING TAX Introduction to resident withholding tax  ¶15-010  Resident Withholding Tax  ¶15-020  Deduction of Resident Withholding Tax  ¶15-070  Persons not liable to deduct resident withholding tax ¶15-080 Agent, trustee and nominee — RWT  ¶15-100  RWT-exempt status  ¶15-110  Payment of Resident Withholding Tax  ¶15-170  Persons not liable to deduct resident withholding tax ¶15-180 Withholding tax and custodial institutions  ¶15-187  RWT withholding certificate to recipient  ¶15-200  Payers’ Obligations: Reconciliation and Disclosure  ¶15-215  Record-keeping and Offences  ¶15-240  ¶15-010 Introduction to resident withholding tax The resident withholding tax (RWT) regime has been in operation since 1 October 1989. Generally, any person making a payment of resident passive income must deduct RWT from the payment unless an exception applies. Resident passive income comprises interest, dividends, taxable Māori authority distributions or a replacement payment paid to a person under a share-lending arrangement. There are exemptions from the tax. See ¶15-110. The tax is intended as the domestic equivalent of non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) and is imposed at source at the time the income is paid. However, in most cases, it is only a withholding tax and the tax deducted is credited against any final income tax liability of the taxpayer deriving  dividends and interest. It is a final tax in the case of a replacement payment paid to a person under a share-lending arrangement. RWT is treated as a refundable credit. See ¶2-110. Therefore, any surplus of RWT credits may result in a refund. To the extent that RWT does not exceed the income tax liability, there will be resulting tax to pay. The tax deductions are taken into account in ascertaining a provisional tax liability. RWT deductions must be accounted for to Inland Revenue on a monthly basis. However, RWT deducted from interest may be accounted for on a six-monthly basis when RWT deductions are estimated to be less than $500 per month. A New Zealand fund manager may act as an RWT proxy when a non-resident unit trust makes distributions to a New Zealand resident unit holder. The system is voluntary for both the fund manager and the recipient of the distribution. A person who has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, held an exemption certificate) is not subject to RWT deductions. See ¶15112.  RESIDENT WITHHOLDING TAX ¶15-020 Resident withholding tax rates Generally, if any person makes a payment consisting of interest or dividends (other than exempt interest or dividends), a taxable Māori authority distribution or a replacement payment under a sharelending arrangement, a deduction of resident withholding tax (RWT) must be made from that payment at the appropriate rate. A company that is entitled to receive a payment of resident passive income must notify its status as a company to the payer. Interest Non-corporate taxpayers Non-corporate taxpayers can elect the RWT rates of 10.5% (if there is a reasonable expectation that income will be $14,000 or less),  17.5%, 30% or 33% by supplying their tax file number and payment rate election to the bank or financial institution. For taxpayers who opened new bank accounts after 31 March 2010 and provided a tax file number but no payment rate election, the default rate is 33%. For those with existing bank accounts before 1 April 2010, the default rate is 17.5%. Where no tax file number is provided at all, the non-declaration rate is 45% (before 1 April 2020, 33%). ▸Note: With effect from 1 October 2021, a non-corporate taxpayer will also be able to elect the RWT rate of 39%. In addition, the default rate for taxpayers who provide a tax file number but no payment rate election will also be 39%. Corporate taxpayers For companies, the default rate is 28% where a tax file number is supplied but no rate is chosen. Companies may also choose a rate of 33% or, from 1 October 2021, 39%. If no tax file number is supplied at all, the non-declaration rate is 45% (before 1 April 2020, 33%). Unsuitable RWT rate With effect from 1 April 2019, if the Commissioner considers a more suitable or more accurate RWT rate could have been used for an interest payment, the Commissioner may recommend a prospective change of the RWT rate to the payee. If the payee consents, the Commissioner will notify the interest payer to update the rate. The payer must use the new RWT rate as soon as reasonably practicable after the date of notification. However, if the payee subsequently notifies the payer of a different rate, the payer must use the rate notified by the payee. Dividends RWT on dividends and replacement payments paid under a sharelending arrangement applies at the rate of 33%. A company has no right to elect an RWT rate when the resident passive income is a replacement payment paid under a share-lending arrangement.  Note that although the company tax rate dropped in 2011, there was not a corresponding drop in the RWT rate for dividends. This means that RWT may need to be deducted from dividends even when they have been fully imputed. Fully imputed dividends paid to a corporate shareholder are excluded from the requirement to withhold RWT if the paying company so chooses (thus avoiding the over-taxation of the dividend). Māori authority distributions RWT is deducted from taxable Māori authority distributions at the rate of 17.5%. The rate of RWT increases to 39% (before 1 April 2021, 33%) if the Māori authority making the distribution does not have a record of the recipient’s tax file number and the distribution exceeds $200. Law: IT07 ss RE 2(5), RE 11, RE 19, sch 1 pt D cls 3–6; TAA ss 26B, 27(1)  ¶15-030 Resident withholding tax on dividends Resident withholding tax (RWT) on dividends is implemented in such a way as to integrate with the dividend imputation system. Under that system, a company may attach imputation credits to dividends at the time a dividend is paid. Where any such credits are attached to a dividend, the amount of RWT payable in respect of the dividend is reduced. A New Zealand fund manager has the option of acting as an RWT proxy if requested to do so by the recipient of a distribution from a non-resident unit trust. See ¶15-074. Dividends not liable for resident withholding tax All dividends as defined in subpart CD (including cash and non-cash dividends) constitute resident passive income except for the following: ▪ dividends paid to a company resident in New Zealand which are exempt income under ss CW 9 (dividends derived from a foreign  company) and CW 10 (dividends derived within a New Zealand wholly-owned group) ▪ an amount deemed to be a dividend on account of being excessive remuneration to a relative (or excessive remuneration by a close company to a shareholder, director or relative) or the non-deductible portion of a rebate paid by a mutual association to a member ▪ a dividend from a portfolio investment entity ▪ a dividend derived by a person who has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, held a valid RWT exemption certificate) ▪ a dividend that is non-resident passive income ▪ a dividend derived by a person not resident in New Zealand other than a dividend which has a New Zealand source ▪ fully imputed dividends paid to a corporate shareholder if the paying company so chooses ▪ a dividend where the payer and recipient company are members of the same group of companies at the time of the payment of the dividend, (other than certain dividends derived by local authorities) ▪ an amount treated as a dividend under s CB 32C (Dividend income for first year of look-through company) ▪ before 1 April 2020, a dividend that was exempt from tax pursuant to an Act other than the Income Tax Act 2007 ▪ a foreign-sourced dividend derived by a transitional resident ▪ a dividend paid by a non-resident company that is carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand through a fixed establishment if the company is not required by generally accepted accounting  practice to express its financial statements in New Zealand dollars (s RE 4(4)) ▪ contributions to a retirement savings scheme that are excluded income by virtue of s CX 50B ▪ a dividend (other than a non-cash dividend) that has an imputation ratio of 30:70 or more and is paid by a unit trust or group investment fund (or their RWT proxy) that has not withheld RWT from any earlier dividend, or ▪ a dividend treated as derived by a person under s GB 1(3) (which applies to arrangements involving dividend stripping). Dividends paid by friendly societies and building societies Dividends paid by friendly societies to their members in relation to shares, and dividends paid by building societies to their members in relation to withdrawable shares, are treated as interest for RWT purposes. Calculation of tax deduction The formulae set out in ss RE 13–RE 15 are used for calculating the amount of RWT to be deducted from dividends. There are different formulae for calculating RWT on dividends (excluding non-cash dividends), non-cash dividends, dividends that are bonus issues in lieu or shares issued under a profit distribution plan and combined cash and non-cash dividends. The meaning of “tax paid or credit attached” in each formula ensures that trans-Tasman imputation credits are taken into account when calculating RWT on dividends paid by non-resident companies. Dividends (excluding non-cash dividends) Generally, RWT on dividends (excluding non-cash dividends) is calculated on the amount of the dividend paid before the deduction of RWT plus any imputation credits attached to the dividend. Credit is then given for any imputation credits attached to the dividend or for any foreign withholding tax paid or payable in respect of the dividend.  The formula for calculating RWT to be deducted from dividends (excluding non-cash dividends) is: (tax rate × (dividend paid + tax paid or credit attached)) − tax paid or credit attached where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1 pt D cl 5 (see ¶15-020) dividend paid is the amount of the dividend (before deduction of RWT), and tax paid or credit attached is the total of the following amounts: — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by an ICA company, the amount of any imputation credit attached to the dividend — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by a company not resident in New Zealand, the amount of any foreign withholding tax paid or payable in respect of the amount of the dividend. Example 1: Company A pays a dividend of $72. The RWT required to be deducted is as follows: Company A $ Dividend paid  72.00  Imputation credit  28.00 100.00  Resident withholding tax  33.00  less imputation credits  28.00  Resident withholding tax payable  5.00  Non-cash dividends The formula for calculating RWT to be deducted from a non-cash dividend but excluding a bonus issue in lieu, a share issued under a profit distribution plan or certain non-cash dividends distributed through intermediaries is: (tax rate × dividend paid ÷ (1 − tax rate)) − tax paid or credit attached where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1 pt D cl 5 (see ¶15-020) dividend paid is the amount of the dividend (before deduction of RWT), and tax paid or credit attached is the total of the following amounts: — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by an ICA company, the amount of any imputation credit attached to the dividend — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by a company not resident in New Zealand, the amount of any foreign withholding tax paid or payable in respect of the amount of the dividend. A company must not make a deduction of RWT from a dividend that is a non-cash dividend. Instead, the company must pay the Commissioner an amount equivalent to the RWT that would have been deducted if the dividend had been a cash dividend. This amount is treated as if it were a deduction of RWT. In June 2017, Inland Revenue released QB 17/07, “Resident and non-resident withholding taxes: non-cash dividends” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 7, August 2017 at 8), which confirmed that RWT paid in accordance with the formula for calculating RWT on non-cash dividends is included in the income of the recipient of the non-cash dividend. This has also now been clarified in the relevant legislation. Dividends that are a bonus issue in lieu  The formula for calculating RWT to be deducted from a bonus issue in lieu or from a share issued under a profit distribution plan from 1 October 2012 (see ¶16-570) is: (tax rate × (alternative amount + tax paid or credit attached)) − tax paid or credit attached where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1 pt D cl 5 (see ¶15-020) alternative amount is: — for bonus issues, the amount of money offered as an alternative to the bonus issue (before deduction of RWT) — for shares issued under a profit distribution plan, the net amount offered by the company for the repurchase of the share (before deduction of RWT), and tax paid or credit attached is the total of the following amounts: — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by an ICA company, the amount of any imputation credit attached to the dividend — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by a company not resident in New Zealand, the amount of any foreign withholding tax paid or payable in respect of the amount of the dividend. If the calculation results in a negative amount, no RWT is to be deducted. Combined cash and non-cash dividends With effect from 1 April 2017, a formula was introduced for calculating the RWT obligation when cash and non-cash dividends are paid contemporaneously. Section RE 14B provides the payer with the option of combining cash and non-cash dividend payments and accounting for RWT as if the two dividends were a single  dividend. The section only applies when the cash dividend is equal to or greater than the amount of RWT payable under the formula in the section and the payer elects to apply the section. The formula for calculating the amount of RWT to withhold and pay to the Commissioner for a combined cash and non-cash dividend is: (tax rate × (dividends + tax paid or credit attached)) − tax paid or credit attached where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1 pt D cl 5 (see ¶15-020) dividends is the total amount of the cash dividend and the noncash dividend paid (before deduction of RWT) tax paid or credit attached is the total of the following amounts: — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by an ICA company, the amount of any imputation credit attached to the dividend — if the dividend is paid in relation to shares issued by a company not resident in New Zealand, the amount of any foreign withholding tax paid or payable in respect of the amount of the dividend. The total amount of the cash and non-cash dividends is treated as one payment of one dividend and the amount calculated under the formula is the amount to be deducted from the combined dividend. If the payer elects to apply s RE 14B, neither s RE 13 nor RE 14 will apply to the dividends. If a taxpayer provides a non-cash dividend and wishes to provide a cash dividend simply to satisfy the RWT liability on the non-cash dividend, then the following formula provides how much cash dividend is required:  cash dividend = 0.4925 × non-cash dividend − tax paid or credit attached Example 2: Co X wishes to provide a non-cash dividend of $360. The non-cash dividend has imputation credits of $140 attached. Co X wishes to provide a cash dividend solely to satisfy the RWT liability. cash dividend = 0.4925 × 360 − 140 = $37.30 If Co X provides a cash dividend of $37.30, the RWT payable is also $37.30.  Conversion of resident passive income denominated in foreign currency There are specific conversion rules when the resident passive income is denominated in a foreign currency. When calculating the amount of RWT to be credited against income tax, the recipient of the passive income may convert using rates of exchange published by the Commissioner or the close-of-trading spot exchange rate on the date of deduction. When calculating the amount of RWT to be paid to the Commissioner, the person deducting withholding tax may use the close-of-trading spot exchange rate on the first working day of the month following the month of deduction or, from 1 April 2020, the exchange rate on the date on which the payment of income is received. Tax deduction certificates should show the passive income and RWT in New Zealand dollars. For a dividend paid by an Australian imputation credit account company in Australian currency, the dividend may be converted at the exchange rate under s OB 60(6) if the company chooses (see ¶17-235). Treatment of “dividends treated as interest” RWT deductions made in relation to dividends treated as interest are treated somewhat differently to RWT deductions from other dividends. A “dividend treated as interest” is a dividend paid by a non-resident company, a company which is prohibited from distributing all of its  income to its proprietor, members or shareholders, a tax-exempt company or a company engaged in New Zealand in life insurance or reinsurance. In most cases, RWT obligations in respect of such dividends are dealt with in a similar manner to RWT on interest, although the rate of RWT on such dividends is 33%. These dividends are not generally subject to the imputation regime. Because no imputation credits may be attached to these dividends, the amount of withholding tax may not be reduced in a manner similar to that deducted from ordinary dividends that may have such credits attached. Law: IT07 ss RE 2(1)(b), (4), (5), RE 4(4)–(7), RE 13–RE 15, YA 1  ¶15-040 Resident withholding tax on interest Interest Resident withholding tax (RWT) is also imposed on interest. The term “interest”, for the purposes of the RWT rules, is any payment made in respect of money lent, other than a repayment of money lent (ie principal). A “redemption payment” is also “interest” for the purposes of the RWT rules. A redemption payment includes a payment made on a commercial bill (the liability to RWT is to the extent of the difference between the issue price and the redemption proceeds), as well as the redemption of any other debt instrument to the extent that it is not a repayment of money lent. Example 1: TP Ltd has a number of commercial customers who do not pay their accounts by the due date and are then charged interest at the rate of 2% per month. Do these customers need to deduct RWT from the interest that they pay? For the purposes of RWT, “interest” is defined as a payment in respect of “money lent”. This includes credit given. Consequently, there is a potential for all payments on overdue accounts to be “interest” as defined. However, the definition of “exempt interest” (see below) would seem to exclude payments on overdue accounts where the credit given is generally accepted commercial practice and where the purchase of the goods or services is in the ordinary course of the purchaser’s taxable activity. Consequently, TP’s customers are not required to deduct RWT.  A payment of a guarantee fee would also appear to fall within the definition of “interest”, as such a payment is in respect of money lent. It follows that a guarantee fee would be subject to the RWT rules. Interest that is not resident passive income The following types of interest are exempt from RWT: ▪ exempt interest, which is defined as interest that is: □ payable under ordinary trade debts □ payable in accordance with a hire purchase agreement □ derived by a non-resident in relation to a loan to the New Zealand Government or to a local or public authority or, before 1 April 2020, expressly exempted by any other Act □ payable under a specified or finance lease □ payable in relation to a loan made under the small business cashflow scheme □ payable in relation to the repayment of a grant under the COVID-19 resurgence support payments scheme □ payable on a bonus bond or Post Office bonus bond as defined in s 2 of the Post Office Bank Act 1987 □ payable on any overpaid levy under s 173 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001, and □ payable under s 84 of the KiwiSaver Act 2006. ▪ interest derived by a person who has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, held a valid exemption certificate) ▪ interest that is non-resident passive income ▪ interest derived from outside New Zealand by a person not resident in New Zealand  ▪ foreign-sourced interest derived by a transitional resident ▪ interest where companies are in the same group (group status can be determined on a day-by-day basis) ▪ use of money interest payable by a taxpayer under Pt 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) ▪ interest paid to an intermediary by a client in the operation of a tax pooling account ▪ interest paid by the Commissioner to an intermediary on an amount deposited in a tax pooling account ▪ interest paid by the Commissioner on overpaid tax under s 120D of the TAA (see below), and ▪ interest arising because s EI 2 applies to an inflation-indexed instrument. (Note that RWT is withheld on both the interest and the inflationindexed component at the time the bond coupon is paid. In addition, the payer’s obligation to deduct RWT is limited to the amount of the interest payment.) ▸Note: In November 2020, the Commissioner released a draft Question We’ve Been Asked, ADV000097, “Whether ‘negative interest’ payments are subject to withholding taxes”. A negative interest payment means a payment made as a term of a financial transaction where money is advanced at a negative rate of interest. The payment is made by the person advancing the money to the person receiving the money. It effectively reverses the usual position for interest where the borrower pays interest to the lender. New Zealand has never had negative interest rates, but such a practice is being considered widely overseas. As a result, banks and financial institutions in New Zealand have asked the Commissioner whether withholding taxes will apply to negative interest payments.  The draft item concludes that the payments will not be subject to withholding taxes. For the RWT and NRWT rules to apply, the payment must be made to a person by another person for money lent. Negative interest cannot truly be said to be paid for money lent. If it was paid “for” money lent than it would be in return for the money lent. However, negative interest is paid to the person receiving the money and it is not a return to a lender from a loan. Dividends paid by friendly societies and building societies Dividends paid by friendly societies to their members in relation to shares, and dividends paid by building societies to their members in relation to withdrawable shares, are treated as interest for RWT purposes. Interest payable by Commissioner on overpaid tax Interest paid by the Commissioner on overpaid tax is no longer subject to withholding at source, although it remains assessable income for tax purposes. The interest is included in a taxpayer’s residual income tax calculation and either added to provisional tax payments or paid at the terminal tax date. Resident withholding tax on relationship property court-ordered interest The Commissioner considers that RWT is not required to be deducted from relationship property court-ordered interest on the presumption that such interest is not resident passive income for the purposes of subpart RE. Court-awarded interest does not, in the Commissioner’s view, amount to money lent since it is not in relation to money advanced by the spouse, nor is it in relation to a forbearance to sue. However, the interest must be returned as income by the recipient. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 6, December 1995 at 15. This policy is unlikely to have changed in light of the Property (Relationships) Act 1976. Calculation of tax deduction  The amount of RWT to be deducted from interest is calculated in accordance with the following formula: (tax rate × (interest paid + foreign withholding tax)) − foreign withholding tax where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1 pt D cl 3 or 4 (see ¶15-020) interest paid is the amount of interest paid (before deduction of RWT), and foreign withholding tax is the amount of foreign withholding tax paid or payable in respect of that amount of interest. Example 2: Mrs TP has interest income of $1,000 paid to her during the 20X2–X3 income year. She has supplied the bank with her IR file number and has supplied payment rate elections choosing the rate of 33%. RWT of $330 is deducted from the income at source and Mrs TP receives the net amount of $670. When a return is filed, such income should be returned as the gross amount of $1,000 and the RWT may be claimed as a refundable credit against the year-end tax liability. The following table shows Mrs TP’s income tax liability on the interest income and the amount of refund available depending on her marginal tax rate: Marginal rate  17.5%  30%  33%  $  $  $  Net interest received  670  670  670  RWT  330  330  330  Gross interest received  1,000  1,000  1,000  equals net and taxable income  1,000  1,000  1,000  300  330  330  330  330  (155)  (30)  0  Gross tax payable at marginal tax rates 175 less RWT credit equals tax to pay/(refund)  When there is a surplus of refundable tax credits over the income tax liability, the surplus is refundable.  This example was adapted from one prepared by Clinton R Alley, Senior Lecturer, Department of Accounting and Finance, University of Waikato.  The item “foreign withholding tax” of the formula ensures that if any interest is received from overseas, RWT is calculated on the amount of income grossed up by any foreign withholding tax paid. Law: IT07 ss RE 2(1)(a), (3), (4), RE 12, RE 18B, YA 1  ¶15-065 Resident withholding tax on taxable Māori authority distributions Resident withholding tax (RWT) is required to be deducted from certain distributions made by Māori authorities known as “taxable Māori authority distributions”. RWT on taxable Māori authority distributions is implemented in such a way as to integrate with the Māori authority credit attribution system that was introduced to modify the way in which Māori authorities are taxed. See ¶24-288– ¶24-335. Briefly, the credit attribution system operates in a similar way to the company imputation system and allows Māori authority credits to be attached to taxable Māori authority distributions. RWT applies to taxable Māori authority distributions to the extent that Māori authority credits are not attached to the distribution. The definition of “resident passive income” includes taxable Māori authority distributions (other than retirement scheme contributions). A “taxable Māori authority distribution” is an amount distributed by a Māori authority from income derived in the 2004–05 or later tax year that is not exempt from tax. See ¶24-311. Calculation of tax deduction The formulae set out in s RE 16 are used for calculating the amount of RWT which applies to cash and non-cash taxable Māori authority distributions. Taxable Māori authority distributions in cash form Generally, RWT on taxable Māori authority distributions in the form of cash or a credit of an amount of money is calculated on the amount  of the distribution paid before the deduction of RWT plus Māori authority credits attached to the distribution. Credit is then given for any Māori authority credits attached to the distribution. The formula for calculating RWT to be deducted from taxable Māori authority distributions in the form of cash or a credit of an amount of money is (s RE 16(2)): (tax rate × (distribution amount + credit attached)) − credit attached where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1, pt D, cl 6 of the Act (see ¶15020) distribution amount is the amount of the distribution (before the deduction of RWT), and credit attached is the amount of the Māori authority credit attached to the distribution. Non-cash taxable Māori authority distributions A Māori authority must not make a deduction from a taxable Māori authority distribution which is not paid in cash. Instead, the authority must pay the Commissioner an amount equivalent to the RWT that would have been deducted if the distribution were a cash distribution. This amount is treated as if it were a deduction of RWT. The formula for calculating the amount of RWT in relation to a noncash taxable Māori authority distribution is: (tax rate × distribution amount ÷ (1 − tax rate)) − credit attached where: tax rate is the appropriate rate of RWT expressed as a percentage, specified in sch 1, pt D, cl 6 (see ¶15-020) distribution amount is the amount of the distribution before the deduction of RWT, and  credit attached is the amount of the Māori authority credit attached to the distribution. Resident withholding tax deductions treated as Māori authority credits RWT deducted from a taxable Māori authority distribution is treated as a Māori authority credit and is dealt with under the Māori authority credit regime. See ¶24-314. Details of the deduction must be provided to the Commissioner in the annual Māori authority credit account return and recorded in the distribution statement prepared by the Māori authority. Law: IT07 ss RE 2(1)(c), RE 16, RE 24; TAA s 56B  ¶15-067 Replacement payments under share-lending arrangements — RWT In certain circumstances resident withholding tax (RWT) must be deducted from a replacement payment made under a share-lending arrangement. A replacement payment, for a returning share transfer, means a payment to a person of an amount that is: ▪ economically equivalent to a dividend or part of a dividend for an original share, or ▪ increased by an imputation credit attached to the payment. The amount of RWT to be deducted is calculated using the formula in s RE 17. The applicable rate of RWT is 33% for all taxpayers. The share user is effectively required to deduct RWT from any amount of a replacement payment that is not fully imputed by credits from the underlying dividend. RWT deducted does not give rise to a credit of tax for the share supplier; rather, it gives rise to an imputation credit attached to the replacement payment. This imputation credit is in addition to any imputation credit the share user attaches to the replacement payment. See ¶17-040. The share user can claim a deduction for the amount of the replacement payment and any  imputation credits attached to the replacement payment. See ¶10660. For further discussion on the tax treatment of distributions from share-lending transactions, see ¶17-116. Law: IT07 ss RE 2(1)(d), RE 17, RE 25, YA 1  DEDUCTION OF RESIDENT WITHHOLDING TAX ¶15-070 Persons liable to deduct resident withholding tax A person is liable to deduct resident withholding tax (RWT) from resident passive income only if the person is either: ▪ a New Zealand resident for tax purposes, or ▪ a non-resident carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand through a fixed establishment (note exception below) and one of the following applies: ▪ the person has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, held a valid RWT exemption certificate) at the time of payment ▪ the payment is made in whole or in part in carrying on a taxable activity, whether in the capacity of agent or trustee for any other person or otherwise (see below) ▪ the payment is a dividend ▪ the payment is a taxable Māori authority distribution ▪ the payment is a replacement payment under a share-lending arrangement, or  ▪ the person is a custodial institution that pays on or transfers an amount of investment income to an end investor (see ¶15-187). Taxable activity Generally, deductions must be made only by a person resident in New Zealand or a person carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand who is making such payments in the course of that activity. The term “taxable activity” has the same meaning as that given to it in the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985, except that it also includes activities relating to the making of exempt supplies (ie all regular, ongoing activities of any individual or organisation — commercial or non-profit — involving the supply of goods and services). It does not apply to wages or salary. See also ¶15-100 in relation to agents and trustees. Example: If a shareholder has paid interest on his or her debit current account and does not have RWT-exempt status, there is no requirement to deduct RWT provided the interest payment is not made in carrying on a taxable activity (ie the funds are not used by the shareholder for the purpose of supplying goods or services for consideration). Conversely, a company paying interest on a credit shareholder’s current account will generally be paying that interest in the course of a taxable activity. The payment will therefore be subject to RWT if the shareholder does not have RWT-exempt status.  Exception There is a proviso that a person is not liable to deduct RWT if the person can establish that the payment is attributable to, or effectively connected with, a fixed establishment of that person outside New Zealand and all amounts payable are payable in a foreign currency or, in the case of dividends payable by a non-resident company, the company is not required by generally accepted accounting practice to express its financial statements in New Zealand currency. See ¶15-080 for further exceptions in relation to payments of interest.  Law: IT07 ss RE 3, RE 4, YA 1  ¶15-074 Resident withholding tax proxy for a nonresident unit trust New Zealand fund managers may choose to offer withholding tax facilities to their unit holders in relation to dividends received from investments in overseas unit trusts. This option was prompted by a law change in December 2004 which treated distributions to holders of units in foreign unit trusts as taxable dividends instead of nontaxable bonus issues: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 7, September 2005 at 45. The system of resident withholding tax (RWT) proxies is intended to reduce compliance costs; for many investors, withholding of the correct amount of tax from distributions removes the need to file a tax return. The use of an RWT proxy is voluntary for the proxy and the recipient of the dividend, so both parties must agree before the RWT proxy facility can apply. Liability to pay RWT in respect of a dividend from a non-resident unit trust applies only when a person is an RWT proxy for both a payer of resident passive income and a payment of such income in the form of a dividend. What is an RWT proxy? To be an RWT proxy: ▪ the person must give a notice of election to the Commissioner to be an RWT proxy for a non-resident unit trust and for a payment in the form of a dividend ▪ the recipient of the dividend, or of the payment that includes the dividend, must be a natural person or a trustee of a complying trust ▪ the recipient must request the person to act as an RWT proxy in relation to the unit trust ▪ the person must have agreed to act as an RWT proxy for the recipient, and  ▪ the payment by the non-resident unit trust must be made while the election given to the Commissioner is effective. The notice of election must contain the name and postal address of the payer (the non-resident unit trust) and the date from which the election is effective. The election applies from the nominated commencement date until the later of the date specified in a further notice to the Commissioner cancelling the election, or the date on which the Commissioner receives the cancellation notice. Formula for RWT payable by RWT proxy RWT payable by an RWT proxy is calculated under the formula: tax rate × amount paid ÷ (1 − rate) where: tax rate is the applicable RWT rate as set out in sch 1 pt D cl 3 (see ¶15-020), and amount paid is the amount paid to the person receiving the dividend. The formula ensures that RWT is calculated on the net amount of dividend paid. Law: IT07 ss RE 3(1)(c), RE 18; TAA s 124ZF  ¶15-080 Persons not liable to deduct resident withholding tax In relation to interest payments, there is an exemption for certain persons who would otherwise be obliged to make deductions of resident withholding tax (RWT). These are persons who either do not have RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, did not hold RWT exemption certificates) or have RWT-exempt status because their income constitutes exempt income or because the Commissioner granted the status under the special provisions of s 32I of the Tax  Administration Act 1994 (see ¶15-110). If such a person has made, in one tax year, payments of interest totalling $5,000 or less (before 1 April 2020, less than $5,000), he or she will not have to deduct RWT from a payment made in the next tax year unless that payment, when aggregated with other interest payments made earlier that tax year, exceeds $5,000. Example 1: In the course of its taxable activity in the year ended 31 March 20X3, a company pays $3,000 in interest on a shareholder’s credit current account. Because the total amount of interest paid in the year ended 31 March 20X3 is $5,000 or less, the company will not have to deduct RWT from that payment. If in the following year (ie the year ended 31 March 20X4) interest of $2,500 is paid on a shareholder’s current account on 30 June 20X3 and on 30 September 20X3 a further $2,600 of interest is paid, RWT will need to be deducted from the payment of $2,600 and any subsequent payments. This is because the sum of the interest payments made on 30 September 20X3 and 30 June 20X3 exceeds $5,000.  For special disclosure requirements, see ¶15-220. With effect from 1 April 2020, a person who pays interest in the course of carrying on a taxable activity is required to withhold RWT from that interest only if the amount that relates to the taxable activity is more than $5,000 for the tax year. Example 2: James borrows $150,000 from his parents to buy his first home. He pays $7,500 interest payments per year. He uses the garage of the house for his business of selling go-karts. The garage is 15% of the total size of the house, so 15% of the interest ($1,125) is treated as being related to his taxable activity. Before 1 April 2020, James would have needed to withhold RWT and report the interest paid to Inland Revenue. Since 1 April 2020, James no longer needs to withhold RWT. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 32.  Non-resident withholding tax A person who believes, on reasonable grounds after making reasonable enquiries, that a payment or receipt constitutes non-  resident passive income, and has complied with any obligations in connection with the deduction of tax from such income, is not liable for RWT. The payment or receipt is deemed to be derived by a nonresident. The above requirement was not met in Case 11/2011 (2011) 25 NZTC ¶1-011. In that case, a New Zealand trust made interest payments to a Hong Kong based company that was found to be tax resident in New Zealand. Accordingly, the interest payments were subject to RWT rather than NRWT and the approved issuer levy (AIL) regime. The trust argued that it was excused from making RWT deductions on the basis that it had concluded on reasonable grounds after making reasonable enquiries that the recipient of the interest was non-resident. Rejecting this argument, the Taxation Review Authority held that in order to meet the statutory criteria the taxpayers should have obtained taxation advice in relation to the matter. Advice as to the residency of the Hong Kong company was not obtained until a number of years after the interest payments commenced and, even then, the advice was not based on all of the relevant facts. On appeal, the High Court did accept that reasonable inquiries had been made of the parties who would have been in possession of all relevant facts but held that the conclusion that the payments constituted non-resident withholding income was not reached on reasonable grounds. See Vinelight Nominees Ltd v C of IR (2012) 25 NZTC ¶20-155. Resident and non-resident with joint account Inland Revenue (IR) considers that if a non-resident and a resident hold a joint account, non-resident withholding tax and RWT can be deducted proportionately if the payer knows the proportions that relate to each person. The non-resident can claim a refund from IR by filing an annual return. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 2, February 1999 at 12. Law: IT07 ss RE 10, RE 22  ¶15-100 Agent, trustee and nominee — RWT  When a person receives resident passive income as an agent, trustee or, in some cases, nominee, he or she must deduct the tax if the payer has not done so. If a nominee has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, held an RWT exemption certificate) or is paid an amount in the conduct of a taxable activity carried on by that nominee, and some or all of the amount is resident passive income, then the nominee is obliged to deduct resident withholding tax (RWT). This obligation can extend to a trustee who is a member of a professional practice (such as a solicitor) irrespective of whether the practice has RWT-exempt status. Payment The payment must be made to the Commissioner no later than the 20th of the month following the month in which it is received. A recipient who has RWT-exempt status at the time of the payment or receives the payment as trustee of a trust (not being a bare trustee) is not obliged to do this. It appears, therefore, that the obligation applies only to persons who either have RWT-exempt status but are not receiving payments as trustees (other than bare trustees) or do not have RWT-exempt status but are receiving the income in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. When the tax deducted in this way is from income that consists of dividends, the tax deducted is treated as being in respect of “dividends treated as interest” and, consequently, is not subject to the special treatment accorded to tax deductions in respect of other dividends. Non-cash dividends An agent, trustee or nominee is not required to make a deduction from dividends which are non-cash dividends. Instead, they must pay the Commissioner an amount equivalent to the RWT that would have been deducted if the dividend had been a cash dividend. This amount is treated as if it were a deduction of RWT. A trustee must also be conscious of the obligations that apply when making payments in the course of a taxable activity and of the fact that the term “payment” is defined to include crediting on account (see ¶15105). Exclusions  A trustee who receives resident passive income consisting of a replacement payment under a share-lending arrangement is excluded from the requirement to deduct RWT. An agent or bare trustee for a transitional resident may be excluded from the requirement to deduct RWT where the income is exempt under the temporary tax exemption for transitional residents (see ¶5700). Law: IT07 ss RE 5(3), RE 7–RE 9  ¶15-105 Deduction to be made when resident passive income “paid” Deduction of resident withholding tax (RWT) is to be made at the time of payment of the resident passive income. “Pay” is defined as including when amounts are distributed, credited, or dealt with in the interest of or on behalf of a person. The time at which the interest or dividends are so credited or dealt with will determine the timing of the RWT liability. Example: TP invests in a company that is put into receivership. The receiver continues to credit interest to TP’s account in the event of an eventual payout. Is it necessary for the receiver to deduct RWT from any amounts credited? The term pay is defined in s YA 1 to include distribute to, credit to or deal with in the interest or on behalf of a person. Resident withholding tax obligations are imposed on the payer of interest when the interest is paid. It would seem likely, therefore, that TP will receive the interest in question. However, in Permanent Trustee Co v FC of T (1940) 6 ATD 5; 2 AITR 109 where a lender was credited with interest, there being no prospect that the interest would be received, it was indicated that no income had actually been derived. It could, therefore, be open to the receiver to argue that no RWT deductions are required and to TP that no interest has been derived.  Shareholders’ current accounts In practice, it is common that any interest charged on shareholders’ current accounts is determined and calculated during preparation of the year-end financial statements (ie after balance date). The time  that the RWT liability arises depends on how the interest is recorded. If the interest is credited to a general provision (rather than the shareholders’ current account), and the shareholders’ resolution states that the interest on the shareholders’ current account is not available to be paid or credited to the shareholders until ratification of the financial statements, the RWT liability will arise on ratification of the year-end financial statements. It is only from this time that the shareholders will be entitled to the interest income. Payment of the RWT will therefore be required on the 20th of the month following ratification. If the interest is credited to the shareholders’ current account (rather than a general provision), it will be “paid” for the purposes of the RWT rules on the date the journal entry is posted. If the RWT is not paid by the 20th of the month following the journal entry date, late payment penalties and use of money interest will be payable on the unpaid RWT. Law: IT07 ss RA 9, YA 1  RWT-EXEMPT STATUS ¶15-110 RWT-exempt status A person who makes a payment of resident passive income to a person who has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, held an RWT exemption certificate) does not deduct resident withholding tax (RWT), because income of this kind is not resident passive income. See ¶15-115. The exemption does not arise simply by virtue of the recipient being within one of the categories of entities eligible for the exemption. The entity must apply for and be granted RWT-exempt status. The following entities may apply for RWT-exempt status: ▪ a registered bank ▪ a building society ▪ a portfolio investment entity  ▪ Public Trust or any company that would be a member of the same wholly-owned group of companies as Public Trust if Public Trust were a company ▪ the Māori Trustee ▪ the trustee of the Niue International Trust Fund ▪ the trustee of the Tokelau International Trust Fund ▪ a statutory trustee company ▪ a person whose principal activity is the business of borrowing and lending money ▪ a nominee company subject to rules made by the Council of the New Zealand Law Society and operated by a barrister and solicitor or an incorporated law firm ▪ a practitioner or incorporated firm in relation to the operation of their trust account maintained in accordance with s 112 of the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act 2006 ▪ a broker’s nominee company to which the Securities Act (Contributory Mortgage) Regulations 1988 apply ▪ a person or organisation that has filed all the required tax returns by the relevant due dates and whose annual gross income in the most recent of those returns was $2m ▪ a person or organisation whose expected annual gross income for the next accounting year is more than $2m (see ¶15-130) ▪ in relation to the tax-exempt activity only, a person whose income is wholly or partly exempt because that person is: □ a public authority □ a local authority  □ a public purpose Crown-controlled company □ a friendly society □ a society for scientific or industrial research □ a charity □ an estate held for charitable purposes □ a business which is also a charity □ a promoter of veterinary services □ a promoter of herd improvement □ a promoter of amateur sport □ a racing club or a racing organisation listed in s CW 47 □ a local or regional improvement body (formerly known as a district improvement society) □ the Trustees of Cornwall Park □ a trustee of an employer fund established to meet employee funeral expenses under s CW 45 (see ¶24-134) □ a community trust as defined in s 4 of the Community Trusts Act 1999 □ exempt from income tax under some other statute ▪ a board constituted under subpart 5 of Pt 3 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, a Board of Trustees constituted under Pt 9 of the Education Act 1989) and not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual  ▪ a tertiary education institution established under subpart 3 of Pt 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, Pt 14 of the Education Act 1989) and not carried on for the private pecuniary profit of any individual, or ▪ a tertiary education subsidiary that derives exempt income under s CW 55BA ▪ a non-profit organisation that, but for the exemption in s DV 8 (see ¶24-120), would have had net income of less than $1,000 for the most recently completed accounting year. Registered charity Under ss CW 41 and CW 42 a charitable body will not be exempt from income tax, and therefore cannot apply for RWT-exempt status, unless it has registered with the Charities Registration Board (previously known as the Charities Commission). With effect from 1 April 2020, a charitable trust registered under the Charities Act 2005 is treated as having RWT-exempt status for the duration of the registration. Special circumstances Exempt status may also be granted in special circumstances if a taxpayer is in a tax loss situation or the person would be, or is likely to be, entitled to claim aggregate RWT credits exceeding the tax liability of that person by $500 or more. A set of budgeted accounts detailing the projected income, deductions, RWT credits and income tax liability must be forwarded with the application together with any other information, in relation to the person or budgeted accounts, that the Commissioner may require. Electronic Register With effect from 1 April 2020, persons that have RWT-exempt status are included in an electronic register maintained and published by Inland Revenue (IR). Investors with RWT-exempt status have to notify their investment provider of their status and payers of  investment income are able to confirm that investors have RWTexempt status on the electronic register. Recipients of investment income that are exempt from tax under another Act need to apply for RWT-exempt status and are then included on the electronic register if they wish to continue to be treated as being exempt from RWT. The income is still exempt income, so if the recipient does have RWT deducted, they can apply to IR for a refund of the deducted RWT. Law: IT07 ss RE 5(2), RE 27(1); TAA ss 32E, 32I  ¶15-112 Application for RWT-exempt status An eligible person (as set out in ¶15-110) may apply to the Commissioner for RWT-exempt status on form IR 451. The application must state the basis of exemption and include a declaration by the person or an authorised officer that they come within that basis of exemption. If the person meets the requirements, the Commissioner must then publish the person’s tax file number and the start date and, if applicable, the end date on the electronic register of persons with RWT-exempt status. The Commissioner must also notify the person of the issue of the status and the start and end date, as applicable. A person’s RWT-exempt status will take effect on the start date provided in the electronic register. If a person held a current RWT exemption certificate before 1 April 2020, the person is automatically included on the electronic register unless their exemption was cancelled, expired or revoked, or the person was exempt under another Act and has not been approved under one of the other criteria set out in ¶15-110 above. Law: TAA ss 32E, 32H  ¶15-115 Payment to person with RWT-exempt status A payment does not constitute resident passive income subject to withholding tax when the recipient has RWT-exempt status (before 1  April 2020, held an RWT exemption certificate). A person is able to establish whether a person has RWT-exempt status by establishing: ▪ they have made a search of the electronic register (see ¶15-110) ▪ they have taken reasonable steps to confirm the person is a person listed in s 32E(2)(a) to (h) of the TAA, or ▪ except in relation to certain persons deriving exempt income or to whom the Commissioner has provided RWT-exempt status under s 32I of the TAA, they have been given the person’s tax file number and have been notified that person has RWT-exempt status. Compliance issues for payers Investors with RWT-exempt status must notify their investment provider of their status and payers of investment income are able to confirm that investors have RWT-exempt status on the electronic register. The Commissioner is required to publish the list of persons with RWT-exempt status on the electronic register and this is updated overnight every business day. Joint accounts In cases where a person with RWT-exempt status has a joint account with another person who does not have RWT-exempt status, IR considers that the payer must deduct RWT from all the interest paid. The exempt status holder can, however, claim a tax refund when filing an annual return. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 2, February 1999 at 12. Law: IT07 ss RE 5, RE 29; TAA s 32E(2)  ¶15-130 Income exceeding $2 million —RWT-exempt status A person who has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, issued with an RWT exemption certificate) on the basis that his or her  annual gross income for the next accounting year is estimated to exceed $2m must provide the Commissioner with evidence of his or her gross income within three months of the end of the relevant accounting year. In the case of a company that is a member of a group of companies, the $2m threshold is satisfied if group income exceeds $2m. This enables each group member to obtain RWTexempt status (even though the income of that member will not reach the threshold). Law: TAA ss 32F, 32G  ¶15-140 Surrender or revocation of RWT-exempt status Surrender When a person becomes aware that they no longer meet the requirements for RWT-exempt status, they must notify the Commissioner within five days after the day they become aware. If requested to do so, the person must provide the Commissioner, within five days, with the full name and last known address of all persons to whom they have advised their RWT-exempt status. Revocation of RWT-exempt status RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, an RWT exemption certificate) may be revoked by the Commissioner at any time if: ▪ the Commissioner reasonably believes the person no longer satisfies the requirements upon which the exemption was based ▪ the person did not meet the requirements, having obtained the exemption on the basis of misleading information ▪ the person should not have been provided with RWT-exempt status ▪ contrary to the person’s estimate, evidence shows that the person did not derive annual gross income of more than $2m or the evidence was unsatisfactory or was materially incorrect or  misleading, if this was the basis of the exemption (see ¶15-130), or ▪ the person has not paid any income tax by the due date. If the Commissioner considers the person qualifies for another category of exemption, the Commissioner must not revoke the RWTexempt status. Notification by Commissioner The Commissioner must notify a person whose RWT-exempt status has been revoked within 30 working days of the revocation. The Commissioner may also request the person provide the Commissioner, within five days, with the full name and last known address of all persons to whom they have advised their RWT-exempt status. The person must notify, within five days, all those persons to whom they have advised their RWT-exempt status and from whom they expect to receive further payments of resident passive income that their status has been revoked. Law: IT07 s RE 27(2), (3); TAA ss 32K, 32L  ¶15-160 Unincorporated body and RWT An “unincorporated body” (eg a partnership, a joint venture, or trustees of a trust) is subject to special rules for the purposes of resident withholding tax (RWT). When such a body has RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, was issued with an RWT exemption certificate) in relation to the carrying on of a taxable activity, the following rules apply: ▪ the members cannot themselves have RWT-exempt status in relation to that taxable activity ▪ payments made in the course of that activity are deemed to be made by the body and not by any member  ▪ payments made to any member acting as a member of that body are deemed to have been made to the body and not to the member ▪ the RWT-exempt status is in the name of the body ▪ changes in membership have no effect so far as RWT is concerned except that (1) members are jointly and severally liable while they are members, and their estates are severally liable upon their deaths (where the member(s) are individuals), and (2) membership does not cease until a change of membership is notified to the Commissioner. Responsibilities in relation to RWT are the joint and several responsibilities of the following persons where a body is not a partnership, joint venture or trustees of a trust: ▪ every member holding office as president, chairperson, treasurer, secretary or similar, or ▪ in default of any such member, every committee member. Law: IT07 s RE 30; TAA s 32J  PAYMENT OF RESIDENT WITHHOLDING TAX ¶15-170 Payment of RWT to Commissioner A person who makes a payment of resident passive income (for example, interest or dividends) must deduct the appropriate amount of resident withholding tax (RWT) and forward the amount to Inland Revenue (IR) by the due date. Interest A monthly payment of RWT to IR is required from any person who estimates that in a year to 31 March he or she will be required to make RWT deductions of at least $500 during each month of the  year. This amount must be paid by the 20th of the month following the month of deduction. If a taxpayer estimates that RWT payable in each month will not exceed $500, payment is made in two instalments. The first instalment is due and payable on 20 October for payments of RWT on interest for the period 1 April to 30 September. The second instalment is due and payable on 20 April in the following year for tax on interest for the period 1 October to 31 March. When a person discovers that deductions of $500 or more have been made since the beginning of the previous month, those deductions must be paid for that two-month period by the 20th of the month following the second month. Dividend Any deduction of RWT on a dividend (including a dividend treated as interest) must be paid monthly on the 20th of the month following the month of deduction. An RWT proxy who must pay RWT in relation to a dividend is treated as having deducted RWT from the dividend at the time the dividend is paid. Taxable Māori authority distributions Māori authorities must pay all RWT deducted from taxable Māori authority distributions to IR on a monthly basis, no later than the 20th of the month following the month of deduction. Share-lending arrangements RWT deducted from replacement payments under share-lending arrangements is payable to the Commissioner on a monthly basis, no later than the 20th of the month following the month of deduction. Cessation of taxable activity or exemption cancelled Where, in any month, a person who is required to deduct RWT: ▪ ceases to carry on any taxable activity where RWT deductions have been made  ▪ ceases to carry on any such taxable activity in New Zealand, or ▪ ceases to have RWT-exempt status (before 1 April 2020, to hold a valid RWT exemption certificate) that person must pay all RWT deductions to the Commissioner no later than the 20th day of the following month. Corporate migration Where a company emigrates, s RA 18 requires that the company must pay the RWT arising from any deemed distribution to New Zealand shareholders of the migrating company within three months of the emigration date. Law: IT07 ss RA 6(1), RA 9, RA 10, RA 15–RA 18, RE 20, RE 21, RE 26, RE 28  ¶15-180 Correcting errors and refunds of deductions of RWT A person who deducts less than the correct amount of tax from a payment of resident passive income paid to another may make up the difference by deducting the tax from subsequent payments, recovering the deficiency from the other person, or adjusting the amount subject to tax for a non-cash dividend. Note that before 1 April 2020, the error correction provisions did not apply to non-cash dividends. However, the provisions were extended to cover non-cash dividends from 1 April 2020, allowing payers to make a correction by grossing up the payment for tax. Where the error is discovered in the tax year in which it is made, the payer must make the adjustment by the next regular reporting date for the investment income information relating to the payee (see ¶15215) if it is reasonably practical to do so. Where the error is discovered in a later tax year, the payer may make an adjustment by the next regular reporting date for the delivery of investment income information in that later year if they are under the threshold for error correction. The total adjustments in the later year  relating to the earlier year must be no more than the greater of $2,000 or 5% of the payer’s RWT withholding liability for the year in which the error occurred. For example, if the payer paid $1,000,000 of RWT in the year of the errors, RWT errors of up to $50,000 could be corrected in the later year. The payer must notify the Commissioner of an adjustment made in a later tax year, including the applicable information set out in sch 6 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (as specified in s RA 11(6) of the Income Tax Act 2007). Note that where the adjustment is to be made by recovering an amount from the payee to correct the deficiency, the recovery action must be taken in the same tax year in which the error is made. Corrections made that meet these requirements will be treated as having been made in time and as such will not be subject to penalties or interest. Refunds of excess deductions If there is an excessive deduction, the payer can refund to the payee the excess deduction at any time up to 20 April after the end of the tax year in which the deduction was made, whether or not the deduction has been paid to the Commissioner. This is provided that: ▪ where the payee has not provided the payer with their tax file number, no resident withholding tax (RWT) certificate including the excess has been issued ▪ in the case of dividends, other than dividends treated as interest, no shareholder dividend statement including the excess has been given to the payee, or ▪ in the case of a taxable Māori authority distribution, no notice of the kind required by s 31 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 including the excess has been given to a member. If the year-end information has already been provided to the Commissioner, the additional tax credits will be pre-populated into the recipient’s tax records and will be able to be refunded by Inland Revenue if it results in the recipient’s income tax being overpaid.  If the payer has not refunded the excess to the payee, the payer must notify the payee and the Commissioner of the excess by 20 April after the end of the tax year in which the deduction was made. If the payer has refunded the amount, the payer must notify the Commissioner at the time of paying the refund. If the payer has refunded the excess to the payee and not received a refund from the Commissioner, the payer may apply for a refund or subtract the amount from a later payment to the Commissioner, noting the action in the investment income information required. However, note that the payer does not need to make a refund to a payee if the excessive deduction is the fault of the payee of the resident passive income. If the excess amount has been paid to the Commissioner, the Commissioner must refund the overpayment to the payee or to the payer, if they have not already subtracted the amount from a later payment to the Commissioner. No use of money interest is payable by the Commissioner on the excess refunded. If the Commissioner makes an excessive refund to the recipient, the Commissioner may recover that amount. RWT that is refundable may be applied by the Commissioner to satisfy an amount payable by the taxpayer under the Income Tax Act 2007 or the Tax Administration Act. The refund may be applied in accordance with a request made by the taxpayer under the tax transfer rules (see ¶2-148) or, in the absence of such a request, in whatever order or manner as the Commissioner determines. Law: IT07 ss RA 11, RA 12, RA 19, RM 8; TAA ss 25O, 120V  ¶15-185 Resident withholding tax and intermediaries or agents Special rules apply to intermediaries or agents acting on behalf of New Zealand residents with foreign investment fund (FIF) interests. The rules apply if:  ▪ an intermediary or agent receives a distribution from a FIF on behalf of a New Zealand resident ▪ the intermediary has withheld an amount from the distribution under the RWT rules in the belief that the New Zealand recipient was exempt from the FIF rules due to the $50,000 de minimis exemption (see ¶26-125), and ▪ s CD 36 (see ¶16-735) subsequently applies to treat the distribution as not being a dividend. If the above applies then, for the purposes of the tax credit rules and for refunds of tax, the amount withheld is treated as RWT. The intermediary, agent or recipient may apply for a refund of the RWT deducted. An intermediary or agent who has determined that the resident owning the FIF interest has exceeded the $50,000 threshold for FIF interests (see ¶26-125) and has applied for a refund of the amount withheld may also request the Commissioner apply the refund to satisfy other tax liabilities under s RM 10 (see ¶2-145, ¶2-148). Law: IT07 ss RE 10B, RM 8  ¶15-187 Withholding tax and custodial institutions The Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Act, enacted on 23 March 2020, introduced provisions to clarify the withholding and reporting obligations of custodial institutions. The changes apply for both resident withholding tax (RWT) and nonresident withholding tax (NRWT) obligations. The provisions apply from 1 April 2020. A custodial institution acts as a conduit between an investment income payer (eg a company paying a dividend) and an investor. Custodians undertake various functions including settlement services and asset management. The withholding and reporting obligation has been passed from the investment income payer to a “custodial institution” that pays to an “end investor”.  A “custodial institution” is defined as an entity: ▪ that holds financial assets or financial instruments as a bare trustee on account for another person, and ▪ whose activities □ for a resident entity, are supervised or regulated under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013, the Financial Markets Authority Act 2011, the Financial Advisers Act 2008 or the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 □ for a non-resident entity, other than an institution that is carrying on a business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, are supervised or regulated under corresponding legislation in the relevant jurisdiction, or legislation that is substantially similar. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remed