 six weeks of becoming an investor in the PIE. If they do not do so, the multi-rate PIE fund is required to close the member’s account and pay them the balance of their investment. Non-resident investors who do not have a tax file number but provide their country’s equivalent are not subject to the six-week notice requirement. However, if the non-resident investor becomes resident, they must notify the PIE they have become resident immediately and the six-week period will begin to run from the date of notification of residency. Prescribed investor rate The “prescribed investor rate” (PIR) is: ▪ 0% if the investor is a New Zealand resident: □ company (including a unit trust) □ charity registered under the Charities Act 2005 □ proxy □ investor who exits in a calculation period from a multi-rate PIE that uses the quarterly calculation option □ PIE or superannuation fund (provided that the trustees have not chosen a 17.5% or 28% rate), and  □ person who derives income as a trustee and has not chosen a 10.5%, 17.5% or 28% rate (these investors are termed “zero-rated investors”). ▪ 10.5% for a New Zealand resident: □ natural person who, in either of the two income years immediately before the relevant tax year, derived: — $14,000 or less in taxable income (such as salary, wages, interest and investment income from entities that are not multi-rate PIEs), and — $48,000 or less in the sum of their taxable income and net income attributed from multi-rate PIEs, or □ trustee of certain testamentary trusts. ▪ 17.5% for a New Zealand resident: □ natural person who, in either of the two income years immediately before the relevant tax year, derived: — $48,000 or less in taxable income (such as salary, wages, interest and investment income from entities that are not multi-rate PIEs), and — $70,000 or less in the sum of their taxable income and net income attributed from multi-rate PIEs, and — who did not qualify for the 10.5% rate, or □ trustee of a trust that notifies the multi-rate PIE of this rate for the relevant tax year. ▪ 28% if the investor is: □ a natural person who is a New Zealand resident who did not qualify for the 10.5% or 17.5% rate  □ a New Zealand resident trustee of a trust that notifies the multi-rate PIE of this rate for the relevant tax year, or □ a non-resident. From 1 April 2020, the Commissioner may notify a multi-rate PIE of a tax rate to apply for an investor in that PIE if: ▪ the investor does not have a notified investor rate, or ▪ the Commissioner considers the investor’s notified investor rate is inconsistent with the investor’s PIR and the Commissioner holds sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate for the investor. This allows the Commissioner to proactively provide PIEs with investors’ PIRs. A multi-rate PIE pays tax at the corporate rate in respect of nonresident investors. Income that is unable to be attributed to an investor is treated as income of the multi-rate PIE and is taxed at the corporate tax rate. Zero-rated investors are taxable on their attributed PIE income under the usual tax rules applying to companies or trusts. A zero-rated investor may be attributed tax credits and imputation credits and be permitted a deduction for an attributed PIE loss. The attributed PIE income of individual investors is excluded income. See ¶29-145. Law: IT07 ss HM 6, HM 11, HM 31–HM 48, HM 56–HM 61, YA 1; TAA s 28B  ¶29-120 Calculation of multi-rate PIE tax liability A multi-rate PIE must calculate its portfolio entity tax liability for each investor and for each class of investor in an attribution period using the following formula:  percentage × (income − loss) ÷ days in period − (expenses − credits for fees) where, in general terms: percentage is the percentage of the investor’s entitlement for the day to a distribution by the PIE to that investor class for the period income is the taxable income for the investor’s investor class for the period (see s HM 35(5) and (7), ie assessable income less deductions) loss is the amount of tax loss for the investor’s investor class for the period (see s HM 35(5) and (7)) days in period is the number of days in the attribution period expenses is the total for the day in the period of any management or administration fees paid from or charged to the investor’s account as a member of the investor class and any expenditure of the investor transferred under subpart DV credits for fees are any credits for fees paid or credited to the investor’s account as a member of the investor class on the day. The portfolio entity tax liability is calculated in relation to an investor class and the investors in the class to enable tax credits for New Zealand and foreign tax paid to be attributed among the investors. Fees In Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 6, July 2007 at 42, the Commissioner explained that the item for expenses permits a deduction for fees charged to an investor’s account (calculated as the amount of fees multiplied by the portfolio investor rate of the investor) to be used to directly reduce the portfolio entity tax liability for the investor. The fees that would be deductible are those that are charged to the investor for ongoing management and administration services, including switching fees, in relation to the investor’s  interest. The Commissioner added that the formula also takes into account any fee tax credits (rebates) credited to the investor’s account. These tax credits would increase the portfolio entity tax liability of the investor, as they would be taxable if paid directly to the investor. To permit fees to reduce the income tax payable by the entity, on behalf of investors, is a measure designed to prevent investors having to file a tax return to get a deduction separately. Consequently, fees charged by the multi-rate PIE that are included in the portfolio entity tax liability calculation are not deductible separately to the investor. Similarly, any credits for fees are treated as excluded income to the investor: see ¶29-145. Tax payable by multi-rate PIE The amount of tax payable by a multi-rate PIE for a calculation period is the sum of the amounts for: ▪ each investor class in which the investor has an interest ▪ each investor in an investor class ▪ each attribution period in the calculation period, and ▪ each day in the attribution period. The formula for the calculation is: rate × amount where: amount is the net income or loss (as calculated in formula above) rate is the investor’s notified rate or notified foreign investor rate (see sch 6, Table 1B) or 28% to the extent which the PIE is the sole investor. Example  A multi-rate PIE has four investors with equal interests in the PIE. Investor A has a 10.5% notified investor rate. Investor B has a 17.5% rate. Both Investor C and D have a 28% rate. The multi-rate PIE has elected an attribution period of one day. The income of the multi-rate PIE for the day is $10,000. Management fees for the day amount to $400. The income attributable to each investor is ($10,000 − $400) × 25% = $2,400 Tax is payable in respect of each investor as follows: Investor A: $2,400 × 10.5% = $252 Investor B: $2,400 × 17.5% = $420 Investor C: $2,400 × 28% = $672 Investor D: $2,400 × 28% = $672 Total amount of tax payable is: $2,016.  Law: IT07 ss HM 35, HM 36, HM 46, HM 47  ¶29-125 Listed PIEs A listed PIE is a company that is listed on a recognised exchange in New Zealand or an unlisted company that satisfies the requirements of s HM 18. It does not include a life fund PIE. Section HM 18 allows unlisted companies to be treated as listed PIEs if they meet a number of criteria. The company must have at least 100 shareholders and must be listed on a recognised exchange within two years of it electing to be a listed PIE in order to retain that status. A listed PIE is generally subject to tax in the same manner as a conventional company. However, it is subject to the rules for portfolio investment entities (PIEs) generally, such as the treatment as excluded income of gains from the sale of New Zealand shares and Australian ASX listed shares. A listed PIE must attach full imputation credits (to the extent available) to distributions. A listed PIE can group for loss offset purposes only with its whollyowned subsidiaries: see s IC 3 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 57. Distributions from listed PIE  A dividend or distribution derived by an investor in a listed PIE may be excluded income if the investor is a natural person or trustee investor resident in New Zealand who does not include the receipt in a return of income. A natural person or a trustee may elect to treat the distribution as a taxable amount and use any excess imputation credits as a credit against tax on other taxable income. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 50. A deliberate feature of the taxation of investors in a listed PIE is to allow the returns of a New Zealand resident trustee to be subject to the company rate of income tax rather than the trustee rate (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 3, April 2008 at 117). For all other kinds of investor the dividend or distribution is excluded income to the extent that the dividend is in excess of a fully imputed dividend. Up to that level the dividend is income. Taking both components together the dividend is effectively not subject to further tax under the combination of imputation credits and classification of the balance as excluded income. This treatment may permit, for example, the distribution to investors of capital gains from the sale of shares in a New Zealand company without investors paying tax on that income (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 3, April 2007 at 50). Law: IT07 ss CX 56C, HM 18, HM 19, IC 3, YA 1  ¶29-130 Excluded share gains of PIE The general principles relating to income and deduction apply to multi-rate PIEs. However, the disposal of certain shares receives special tax treatment. Income derived by a portfolio investment entity (PIE), other than a life fund PIE, from the disposal of a share is excluded income if the share is issued by a company: ▪ resident in New Zealand (and not treated under a double tax agreement as not being resident in New Zealand), or  ▪ resident in Australia (and not treated under a double tax agreement as not being resident in Australia or New Zealand), listed on the Australian stock exchange and required to maintain a franking account. The exclusion does not apply if the share is a fixed-rate share or a share for which the amount on cancellation is no more than the available subscribed capital per share calculated under the slice rule. In addition, there must not be an arrangement for assuring the PIE of having a gain on disposal. However, s CB 26 deems a taxable dividend to arise when a share that satisfies the above criteria of s CX 55 is sold after a dividend is declared but before the dividend is paid. This is to prevent a PIE turning a taxable dividend receipt into a non-taxable gain on sale. Shares in a listed PIE are excluded, because dividends from listed PIEs are not taxable in any event. Law: IT07 s CB 26, CX 55  ¶29-135 PIE losses Formation losses Losses of a portfolio investment entity (PIE) arising before the entity elected to become a PIE (or as a result of becoming a PIE through the deemed disposal and re-acquisition process) are formation losses. Multi-rate PIEs that pay tax on a provisional tax basis and other PIEs can carry these losses forward to income years in which they are a PIE in accordance with the loss rules in Part I. Multi-rate PIEs that use the quarterly or exit calculation options may carry forward their formation loss to the quarter in which the entity becomes a PIE. The PIE may attribute the formation loss to investor classes for attribution periods for use against its net income in accordance with the following rules: ▪ tax credits that originate from tax paid in New Zealand must be used before the portfolio entity formation loss can be applied  ▪ if the total formation loss is less than 5% of the total market value of the PIE’s investments at the time it becomes a PIE, the PIE may allocate the entire formation loss to one or more attribution periods, and ▪ where the total formation loss is 5% or more of the total market value of the PIE’s investments at the time it becomes a PIE, the amount that the PIE may allocate to each day in an attribution period is limited to 1/1095 of the total formation loss. This effectively spreads the use of the formation loss over the period of the first three years of status as a PIE. Regardless of the amount of formation loss that can be allocated to an attribution period pursuant to the above, s HM 35(5) limits the amount of formation loss that can be used to offset net income in an attribution period to the amount of the net income. This prevents a formation loss from being used to generate a taxable loss that would give rise to a refundable credit. With effect from 29 March 2018, the definition of “formation losses” has been extended to include a tax loss arising from a period a PIE applied the provisional tax calculation method before applying a different calculation method. Multi-rate PIE losses Where a multi-rate PIE (which has not elected under s HM 44 to be a provisional taxpayer) incurs losses in respect of its investment activities, those losses are attributed to each investor and, in the case of individual investors, to the extent that they are unused, the tax effect of those losses is converted to a tax credit for the benefit of the investor (payable to the multi-rate PIE) at the investor’s tax rate (see ¶11-092). Those losses cannot be carried forward. If a multi-rate PIE elects to be a provisional taxpayer under s HM 44, any losses incurred in an income year can be carried forward rather than giving rise to a tax credit. Zero-rated investors (or investors treated as such under s HM 61) can claim a deduction against their taxable income for the amount of  any investor attributed losses in the income year corresponding to the tax year containing the attribution period. See ¶29-145. The amount of the loss is disregarded for a notified foreign investor in a foreign investment PIE. Land losses When the total value of any land investments (held directly by the multi-rate PIE or through a land investment company or through a non-resident land investment company in which the investor class has a voting interest of greater than 20%) in a class exceeds 50% of the total market value of all the investments in that class, any losses arising from those land investments must be carried forward and offset against other income from that class, and not against income from other investments. Such losses do not give rise to tax credit for the benefit of individual investors. The amount of the land loss is disregarded for a notified foreign investor in a foreign investment PIE. Grouping The grouping provisions in subpart IC apply to a multi-rate PIE that holds shares only in other wholly-owned multi-rate PIEs, foreign PIE equivalents, certain subsidiary companies or land investment companies. Otherwise the grouping provisions do not apply to multirate PIEs. A listed PIE can group for loss offset purposes only with its wholly-owned subsidiaries: see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 57. Law: IT07 ss HM 55, HM 64–HM 70, IC 3(2B)  ¶29-140 Multi-rate PIE credits The discussions below relate only to multi-rate PIEs that have chosen the quarterly or exit calculation options and do not pay tax on a provisional basis. A multi-rate PIE that pays provisional tax cannot in general attribute tax credits to investors. This means that these PIEs cannot use tax credits to offset tax liabilities as they arise, but must wait until the end of the income year to use them.  Tax credit for imputation credits and withholding tax A multi-rate PIE is entitled to a refundable tax credit in respect of imputation credits and for tax paid or withheld in New Zealand that is attributed to certain types of PIE investor in a calculation period. The mechanism for attributing credits in s HM 50(3) mimics the way income is attributed to investors over the same attribution period. Credits are attributed to the class that held the investment that derived the credit, and to investors in that class in accordance with their percentage investor interest in the class and the number of days in the attribution period in which that investor was a member of the class. Where an attributed tax credit in respect of imputation credits and for tax paid or withheld in New Zealand exceeds an investor’s attributed tax liability, the excess amount of the credit is refundable to the multirate PIE. The multi-rate PIE attributes that refund to the investor by making an investor return adjustment. A multi-rate PIE is not entitled to the benefit of imputation credits or other credits for tax paid in New Zealand in respect of a zero-rated investor, including an investor who is treated as zero-rated as a consequence of exiting a PIE that uses the quarterly tax calculation option during a calculation period. A multi-rate PIE passes credits through to zero-rated investors who use them in accordance with s LS 3 or LS 4 (see ¶29-145). Tax credit for an attributed PIE loss Multi-rate PIEs calculate their tax liability on an aggregate/entity basis by reference to the attributed PIE income or attributed PIE loss for each investor and each investor’s notified tax rate. Accordingly, if the aggregate tax calculation for all of the investors in the multi-rate PIE results in a tax loss, the entity as a whole has a tax loss. Where this occurs, the multi-rate PIE is entitled to a refundable tax credit under ss HM 55 and LS 1 in the tax year in which the tax credit was determined. The tax credit is attributed to the relevant investors in accordance with s HM 48 in that same tax year (ie the PIE undertakes an adjustment to investor interest of an investor to distribute the tax credit proportionally to investors based on their  investor interest and their notified tax rate). Because the calculation of the PIE’s tax loss and tax credit is based on the notified tax rates of investors, it can only receive a tax credit for an attributed PIE loss of an investor who is not a zero-rated investor. Foreign tax credits Foreign tax credits are attributed to the class that held the investment that derived the credit and to investors in that class in accordance with their percentage investor interest in the class and the number of days in the attribution period in which that investor was a member of the class. Unlike the New Zealand tax paid credits, foreign tax credits are not eligible to be refunded. In addition, a multirate PIE has no foreign tax credit when the investor is a zero-rated investor, an exiting investor treated as zero-rated or a notified foreign investor in a foreign investment PIE. When a multi-rate PIE attributes a foreign tax credit to a non-zerorated investor, the credit may be used by the multi-rate PIE to offset the tax liability attributable to that investor in respect of any investor class in the multi-rate PIE in which the investor holds an investor interest. Multi-rate PIEs are not subject to the ordinary limitations on the use of foreign tax credits under s LJ 2 and can thus use those credits to reduce tax on New Zealand-sourced income and foreign income of a different nature and source. Foreign tax credits can only be used by the multi-rate PIE to reduce the investor’s attributed PIE tax liability and can only be utilised in the tax year in which they arise. Foreign tax credits that are not used by the multi-rate PIE by the end of the tax year are not refundable or transferable and are forfeited. However, for a multi-rate PIE that uses the quarterly tax calculation option, the credit can be used in a later calculation period in the same tax year. For a multi-rate PIE that uses the exit calculation option, the credit can be used in an earlier or later calculation period in the same tax year. Foreign investment PIEs From the 2013–14 income year, changes were made to the application of supplementary dividend tax credits (also known as  foreign investment tax credit (FITC)) under s LP 2 for foreign investment PIEs. These changes aligned the tax treatment of nonresident portfolio investments made through foreign investment PIEs with those portfolio investments made directly. The FITC rules ensure that the tax rate is limited to 28% on non-resident portfolio investments. The effect of the rules under ss HM 55C–HM 55H is the FITC rules apply to the extent that the company tax has already been paid. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 10, December 2012 at 62 for a more detailed discussion. Law: IT07 ss HM 47(5), HM 49–HM 55, LS 1  ¶29-145 Tax treatment of multi-rate PIE investors A portfolio investment entity (PIE) generally calculates and pays tax on account of investors in the entity. The objective is to ensure that investors in the PIE generally have no income tax liability or tax reporting obligations beyond the income tax paid by the PIE. An investor in a PIE is a person with a shareholding or interest in the entity. In the case of a PIE that is a multi-rate PIE it is recognised that there may be different classes of investor. Investor classes reflect the different investment categories maintained by the multirate PIE. Investors in a multi-rate PIE elect a tax rate and notify the PIE of their election (notified investor rate). This rate is based on the investor’s “prescribed investor rate” (PIR). See ¶29-115. Investors have income and losses attributed to them. See ¶29-135 for a discussion on multi-rate PIE losses. Attributed PIE income derived by an investor in a multi-rate PIE is generally excluded income of the investor except where: ▪ the investor is a zero-rated investor (see ¶29-115). A zero-rated investor accounts for tax on the income from the portfolio investment and, as part of that approach, may be eligible to personally utilise losses and tax credits  ▪ the investor incorrectly advises the multi-rate PIE to calculate tax at a lower rate than the rate at which the income should be taxed at for the period (see ¶29-115). In that case the income is not excluded and must be returned by the investor, with a corresponding credit available for the tax liability satisfied by the multi-rate PIE (see s LS 2) ▪ the income is included in an investor exit period. An exit period may not arise if the multi-rate PIE pays tax quarterly and elects to voluntarily pay tax upon the investor reducing his or her investor interest, or ▪ the investor is a trustee who has chosen a notified investor rate of either 17.5% or 10.5%. An investor is not allowed a deduction for fees attributed to the investor by the multi-rate PIE. The fees are taken into account in the calculation of the tax liability of the multi-rate PIE. It is the investor’s responsibility to respond to the multi-rate PIE’s annual tax rate request. If the multi-rate PIE is not notified that a different prescribed investor rate should be used, the multi-rate PIE may continue calculating the income tax liability in respect of the investor’s attributed income using the previous year’s rate. A New Zealand resident investor has one month to respond to a multi-rate PIE’s request for a tax file number. With effect from 1 April 2018, an investor in a multi-rate PIE (other than a PIE listed on a recognised exchange) must notify the PIE of their tax file number within six weeks of becoming an investor in the PIE. If they do not do so, the multi-rate PIE fund is required to close the member’s account and pay them the balance of their investment. The member is treated as reaching the exit level and the PIE is required to calculate its tax liability in relation to the exiting investor. Non-resident investors who do not have a tax file number but provide their country’s equivalent are not subject to the six-week notice requirement. However, if the non-resident investor becomes resident, they must notify the PIE they have become resident  immediately and the six-week period will begin to run from the date of notification of residency. With effect from 1 April 2020, for the 2020–21 and later income years, the same tax treatment of multi-rate PIE investors applies for both overpayments and underpayments of PIE tax that arise from the use of an incorrect PIR. To achieve refundability of overpaid tax on PIE income and symmetry between over and underpayments, a year-end square-up process applies for all individual investors in multi-rate PIEs, regardless of whether tax on PIE income has been correctly, over- or under-withheld during the tax year. This square-up applies the correct PIR to the PIE income to determine the PIE tax payable. The PIE tax that has been deducted during the tax year is a tax credit against the PIE tax payable. Any refund due or tax payable is added to the person’s end of year tax position and will either be refunded, payable or reduce the person’s tax payable. Distributions from a multi-rate PIE Distributions or dividends from a multi-rate PIE are excluded income to the investor. Credits for fees attributed to an investor are also excluded income to the investor where those credits are included in the PIE’s tax liability. As excluded income, distributions from a multi-rate PIE and credits for fees are not included in the income thresholds for: ▪ family assistance (see ¶12-125) ▪ student loans (see ¶8-010), and ▪ child support (see ¶12-015). Dividends from a PIE are excluded from being resident passive income. See ¶15-030. Zero-rated investors  Any attributed PIE income of a zero-rated investor is taxable to the investor. Generally, a deduction is available for the amount of any losses attributed to the investor. Zero-rated investors that are multirate PIEs themselves are treated as having received any attributed credits received by the multi-rate PIE, without restriction. See ¶29140. Zero-rated investors are also entitled to a credit for any tax liability satisfied by a multi-rate PIE in relation to the investor’s attributed PIE income, any foreign tax credit under s HM 52, and any other amount of tax credit under s HM 54. See s LS 3. Exiting a multi-rate PIE When a multi-rate PIE pays income tax quarterly and an investor exits the entity during a quarter (or within five days following a quarter end), the investor’s attributed income for that last quarter may be zero rated by the multi-rate PIE. If that occurs the investor is required to pay the income tax on the attributed income for the last quarter. The multi-rate PIE informs Inland Revenue (IR) of those zero-rated amounts paid to investors. An investor is entitled to a credit for any tax actually paid by a multi-rate PIE in relation to an amount of attributed income for an investor exit period, any foreign tax credit under s HM 52, and any other amount of tax credit under s HM 54. See s LS 4. When a multi-rate PIE pays tax annually, any income tax in respect of any attributed PIE income of an exiting investor must be calculated and deducted from the exiting investor’s proceeds. That tax is then paid by the multi-rate PIE to IR in the month following the investor’s exit. Mechanisms exist for calculating the tax liability and tax credits of investors who switch portfolio investor classes or reduce the level of their investment in a multi-rate PIE during an income year. Multi-rate PIEs may choose to make voluntary tax payments when those events occur. Return filing exemption Zero-rated investors or investors exiting a multi-rate PIE and receiving small amounts of zero-rated attributed PIE income do not  have to file a return where those amounts, combined with other types of income that have not been correctly taxed at source, total $200 or less. Disposal of interest in a PIE Where an investor disposes of an interest in a PIE, the tax treatment of that disposal will depend on ordinary tax principles. If the investment in the PIE is held on capital account, then any gain on sale will not be taxable. On the other hand, if the interest is held on revenue account any gain will be included as taxable income. Law: IT07 ss CP 1, CX 56, CX 56B, CX 57, DB 53, DB 54, HM 36B, HM 52, HM 54, LS 2–LS 4, RE 2(5)(bb); TAA ss 28B, 31C(5)  ¶29-150 Compliance requirements for multi-rate PIE A multi-rate PIE must file a return in the prescribed form showing its tax liability for the relevant period together with any further information that may be required and pay any income tax. If the PIE does not calculate and pay its tax using the exit calculation or provisional tax calculation options, the filing and tax payment obligations must be performed within one month of the end of the calculation period. A PIE that calculates and pays its tax using the provisional tax calculation option must carry out its obligations as to calculation and payment of tax in accordance with the provisional and terminal tax rules. In the case of a PIE that calculates and pays its tax using the exit calculation option, the entity must file the return and pay tax for an exiting investor within one month of the end of the exit period (or by 15 January if the exit period ends in the preceding November). For investors who hold an investor interest at the end of the tax year, the PIE must calculate and pay tax within one month of the end of the tax year. An additional return must also be filed by the PIE showing any voluntary payments of tax that have been made but not already included in a return. The relevant return must be filed within one  month of the end of the period for which the tax was paid (or by 15 January if that period ends in the preceding November). From 1 April 2020, a PIE must file its return for a tax year in electronic form showing the amount of its tax liability and providing the investment income information required by the Commissioner by: ▪ 15 May after the end of the tax year if the entity is not a superannuation fund or retirement savings scheme and has a corresponding income year ending before the end of the tax year, or ▪ 30 June after the end of the tax year if the entity is a superannuation fund or retirement savings scheme and has a corresponding income year ending before the end of the tax year, or ▪ the end of the second month after the end of the PIE’s corresponding income year if it ends after the end of the tax year, or ▪ the end of the third month after that in which the entity loses PIE status if that event occurs in the corresponding income year. The particular investment income information required is set out in ss 25J and 25K and sch 6 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to bring forward the filing due date by which multi-rate PIEs that are a superannuation fund or retirement savings scheme are required to file detailed income information for their investors to 15 May (from 30 June). This will align such entities with other multi-rate PIEs. The proposed amendment is intended to apply from 1 April 2020. Notices should also be provided by a multi-rate PIE to investors giving information that the Commissioner considers relevant. The date by which the notice must be given differs depending on the type of investor. See s 31C of the TAA.  At least once every year a multi-rate PIE must request that investors provide the entity with the investor’s prescribed investor rate. See ¶29-115. From 1 April 2018, an investor in a multi-rate PIE (other than a PIE listed on a recognised exchange) must notify the PIE of their tax file number within six weeks of becoming an investor in the PIE and, if they do not do so, the multi-rate PIE fund will be required to close the member’s account and pay them the balance of their investment. See ¶29-145. Law: TAA ss 25J, 25K, 28B, 31B, 31C, 57B, sch 6  ¶29-155 Foreign investment PIEs When they were first enacted in 2011, the PIE rules were intended to ensure parity for income tax purposes between investment in a PIE by a New Zealand resident and direct investment in a PIE’s economic assets. Non-resident investors were subject to a flat tax rate of 28% on all types of income. The foreign investment PIE rules address the problem of overtaxation of non-resident PIE investors. The rules apply to a person who elects to be a notified foreign investor — in broad terms, a nonresident other than a CFC, a non-portfolio FIF or a non-resident trustee of a trust other than a foreign trust. The objective of the reforms is for a foreign investment PIE to have a tax liability approximating that which the non-resident investor would have had if the investment had been made directly. Secondly, the notified foreign investor will have no tax liability on PIE income unless they are treated as an investor of that type when they in fact failed to meet the relevant criteria for a notified foreign investor. To enter the regime, the non-resident person must provide the PIE with prescribed information, including name, address, country and tax file number. Responsibility for correctly asserting status as a notified foreign investor lies with the investor, not the PIE. A foreign investment PIE is a multi-rate PIE that meets the criteria in ss HM 55C–HM 55H and elects to become either a foreign  investment zero-rate PIE or a foreign investment variable-rate PIE. If the foreign investment option is not taken, the entity is taxed under the residual PIE rules at a 28% rate on income attributable to nonresidents. A multi-rate PIE can choose to become a foreign investment PIE if it has non-resident investors and does not calculate its income tax liability using the provisional tax calculation option. A zero-rate PIE is taxed at 0% on all PIE income that is attributable to non-residents. As a general rule, these PIEs may derive only foreign-sourced income, although there are some exceptions for “allowable amounts” so as to provide flexibility (see ss HM 19B and HM 55G). A variable-rate PIE is able to invest in New Zealand and overseas assets, but there are different tax rates on income attributable to non-resident investors. The particular rate is determined by the type of income and its source. Despite the general rule that a PIE can hold an interest in land, a foreign investment variable-rate PIE is prohibited from holding an investment that includes an interest, right or option in relation to land in New Zealand (s HM 19C(1)). Calculating income of foreign investment PIEs The following tax rules apply to ensure that PIE income attributed to non-resident investors is taxed in the same way as income from nonresidents’ direct investment: ▪ The foreign investment PIE cannot deduct expenditure or loss relating to the derivation of income attributable to a notified foreign investor, or a transitional resident who has elected a zero tax rate. ▪ The income calculation rules in ss HM 35–HM 47 prevent the deduction of expenses from the income of a notified foreign investor. ▪ A variable-rate PIE must calculate the income tax liability for each notified foreign investor on the basis of the particular income type and source (s HM 47(2B)).  ▪ A zero-rate PIE is not required to identify attributed income by type and source because all the income attributed to the foreign investor is taxed at 0%. ▪ A foreign investment PIE must place notified foreign investors in a notional class separate from other investors subject to the normal PIE tax rules. ▪ A flow-through rule in s HM 6B allows a variable-rate PIE to treat certain New Zealand-sourced income derived from a zero-rate PIE as a foreign-sourced amount. This income comprises the small amounts allowed under s HM 55G as an exception to the requirement that zero-rate PIEs must derive only foreignsourced amounts. ▪ A foreign investment PIE is not allowed to calculate its income tax liability on an income year basis and use the provisional tax option under s HM 44. Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 27 discusses foreign investment PIEs in more detail. A more detailed discussion of the changes implemented under the Taxation (Annual Rates, Returns Filing, and Remedial Matters) Act 2012 can be found in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 10, December 2012 at 62 and 70. Law: IT07 ss CP 1, CX 56, CX 56B, DB 54B, HM 1, HM 2, HM 6, HM 6B, HM 19B, HM 19C, HM 35C, HM 41(4), HM 44(1B), HM 44B, HM 47, HM 55C–HM 55H, HM 71B, IC 3, LS 1, LS 2, YA 1, sch 6; TAA ss 28D, 31B, 31C  KIWISAVER ¶29-200 KiwiSaver — background KiwiSaver is a workplace savings scheme designed to help New Zealanders save for their retirement. It is primarily aimed at  employees but all New Zealanders may join a KiwiSaver scheme. Before 1 July 2019, only New Zealanders under the age of 65 could join a scheme. KiwiSaver started on 1 July 2007 and is governed by the KiwiSaver Act 2006. All eligible employees starting a new job after 1 July 2007 are automatically enrolled in a KiwiSaver scheme. There is provision for the employees to “opt out”, but only in the early stages of membership. Other individuals may join KiwiSaver schemes by “opting in”. The scheme operates by employers deducting a set portion of an employee’s earnings, in much the same way as PAYE, and passing it on, via Inland Revenue (IR), to an approved scheme provider for investment on the employee’s behalf. All employee contributions to KiwiSaver schemes are matched by a compulsory employer contribution of 3% of gross salary or wages. All people who contribute to a KiwiSaver scheme (or a superannuation fund which is substantially similar to a KiwiSaver scheme, ie a complying superannuation fund) are eligible for a Government contribution (previously called a member tax credit) equal to the amount of their contribution to the scheme up to $521.43 ($10 per week). Employer contributions do not count for the purposes of this Government contribution. Trans-Tasman portability of retirement savings A person with retirement savings in both New Zealand and Australia may consolidate the savings in his or her country of residence. KiwiSaver members who permanently emigrate to Australia are able to transfer their KiwiSaver funds, including all Government contributions, to an approved Australian superannuation scheme and vice versa. This optional treatment is the result of an intergovernment memorandum of understanding for trans-Tasman savings portability concluded in July 2009. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 50–52. KiwiSaver first home subsidy  KiwiSaver members can withdraw their accumulated savings and their Government contributions to use for the purchase of a first home (see sch 1 cl 8 of the KiwiSaver Act) after three years of contributing to KiwiSaver. See ¶29-260. The only restriction is that a balance of $1,000 must be left in the account to ensure a member’s account stays open. This replaced the previous restriction on withdrawing the kick-start subsidy, see below. Members who have not owned a home may also be entitled to a first home deposit subsidy. The first home deposit subsidy is administered by Housing New Zealand. The KiwiSaver first home deposit subsidy is a social assistance suspensory loan in recognition of the social policy objects met by this loan. This ensures that recipients of the loan are not subject to income tax when the loan is forgiven. See Income Tax (Social Assistance Suspensory Loans) Amendment Order 2010. KiwiSaver kick-start subsidy The Government previously made a start-up contribution of $1,000 to a person’s KiwiSaver scheme. This was discontinued from 21 May 2015. Additional resources A full summary of the KiwiSaver Act and employers’ obligations under the Act is available in CCH, New Zealand Superannuation Guide. IR publish a booklet KS 4, “KiwiSaver employer guide”, updated April 2020. Further information can be found on the Inland Revenue website at www.ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver. Law: KIW s 3  ¶29-215 KiwiSaver members All eligible employees starting new permanent employment after 1 July 2007 (other than on a secondment or with an exempt employer)  are automatically enrolled as members of KiwiSaver. Eligible employees are New Zealand citizens aged between 18 years and the age of eligibility for New Zealand Superannuation (currently 65). A person who is not automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver can “opt in” to KiwiSaver. Note that before 1 July 2019, a person over the New Zealand superannuation qualification age could not opt in. A person who opts in can either contract directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider or arrange for their employer to start making contributions on their behalf to a KiwiSaver scheme by providing the employer with a KiwiSaver deduction notice (form KS 2, “KiwiSaver deduction form”). Form KS 2 is contained in the KiwiSaver employee information pack that new employees should be given and existing employees can request from their employer. With effect from 1 April 2019, employees must notify their employer of their KiwiSaver status or any change in it. Their KiwiSaver status encompasses: ▪ whether they are a member of an existing KiwiSaver scheme or are choosing to opt into a scheme ▪ if they are an existing member: □ their deduction rate □ whether they are on a saving suspension (before 1 April 2019, a contributions holiday) □ whether they wish to cease deductions because they have reached New Zealand superannuation qualification age □ whether they have chosen to opt out of a scheme ▪ if they are a new member, the information required by the Commissioner, including nominating a contribution rate. This notification can be entered directly into the employer’s software system or on the prescribed paper form: KS 1 “KiwiSaver employee details”.  Employees under the age of 18 are not subject to automatic enrolment but can choose to join KiwiSaver by contracting with a KiwiSaver provider directly. The rules that apply to children under 18 years old provide that children under 16 can be enrolled only by their legal guardians and cannot enrol themselves. However, children aged 16 and 17 can enrol themselves if a legal guardian co-signs the enrolment application. Children aged 16 or 17 who do not have a legal guardian can contract directly with a KiwiSaver provider. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 53–54. When a child under the age of 18 is enrolled the employer is advised by Inland Revenue of the contribution rate for that employee and the commencement date for KiwiSaver deductions. Employees under the age of 18 are not entitled to compulsory employer contributions or to the annual Government contribution (formerly referred to as a member tax credit). Inland Revenue has released a guide for KiwiSaver and children and young people: KS 33 (April 2020). Temporary employees who are employed for 28 days or less and casual agricultural workers (see ¶3-190) who are employed for less than three months are not automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver, but can choose to join KiwiSaver if they wish. Temporary employees or casual agricultural workers whose employment is extended beyond the specified time period are automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver from the date their employment exceeds the threshold. Casual workers (as deemed by s 28(1)(a)(ii) of the Holidays Act 2003) who are paid holiday pay regularly with their salary or wages are also excluded from automatic enrolment. New Zealand Government employees who are serving outside New Zealand are eligible to join KiwiSaver only if they are employed under New Zealand terms and conditions and it is lawful to offer KiwiSaver in the jurisdiction they are serving in. These employees are not automatically enrolled. Self-employed people and other people who are not employees can contract directly with KiwiSaver providers to become KiwiSaver members. Private domestic workers who pay their own PAYE are not automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver but can opt in to KiwiSaver.  Law: KIW ss 4 (“KiwiSaver status”), 9–14, 22, 33–37  ¶29-220 Automatic enrolment in a KiwiSaver scheme From 1 July 2007, every employer in New Zealand is required to automatically enrol all new eligible permanent employees into a KiwiSaver Scheme on the day they commence employment. Eligible employees are New Zealand citizens aged between 18 years and the age of eligibility for New Zealand Superannuation (currently 65). It does not include an employee who is a secondee. Employers must ask all new employees if they are already a KiwiSaver member. If they are not, the employer must give the employee a KiwiSaver information pack within seven days of starting work. These information packs contain all the necessary information for employees to be able to make a decision regarding their participation in KiwiSaver. The information packs must also be given to any employees who opt in to KiwiSaver or who request a pack because they are considering opting in. Employers must provide Inland Revenue (IR) with the names and tax file numbers, and, if required, the address, of all employees who are automatically enrolled or who opt in to KiwiSaver; see form KS 1 “KiwiSaver employee details”. The information must be given no later than the time the employer is next required to deliver their employment income information after the information is given to the employer. An employer who has selected a preferred KiwiSaver provider must also supply employees with: ▪ the product disclosure statement for the offer of interests in that scheme, and ▪ notification that, if employees do not choose their own scheme, they will be allocated to the employer’s chosen scheme (and not to one of the default KiwiSaver schemes).  The automatic enrolment rules do not apply if an employee is already a member of a KiwiSaver scheme. However, a person may only be a member of one KiwiSaver scheme at a time. This means that, when an employee changes employers, contributions deducted by the new employer must be paid via IR to the member’s existing KiwiSaver scheme, or to a new scheme if the member wishes. If the member selects a new scheme, savings in the original scheme will be transferred to the new KiwiSaver scheme. This is achieved by the new KiwiSaver scheme provider providing notification to the existing provider and to IR. See also Inland Revenue’s checklist, “Meeting your employer obligations for KiwiSaver”, KS 45 (April 2020). Law: KIW ss 23, 40–43  ¶29-225 Opting out of KiwiSaver Opting out An employee who is automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver can choose if they want to stay with KiwiSaver, or opt-out. The opt-out period for employees runs from the end of week two of their employment to the end of week eight. Up until the time the employee opts out of KiwiSaver, contributions to KiwiSaver will be made. To opt out the employee must provide Inland Revenue (IR) or the employer with an opt-out notice (form KS 10, “New employee opt-out request”). The notice is effective from the date it is accepted by IR or received by the employer, as the case may be. In practice, the employee can complete and return the form during the first two weeks, but it will not be actioned by IR until the end of the second week. Form KS 10 is contained in the KiwiSaver employee information pack given to all new employees on their start date. See ¶29-220. If an employer receives the opt-out notice, they must give notice of it to the Commissioner no later than the time the employer is next required to deliver employment income information in relation to the employee.  For the purposes of ss 17–20 of the opt-out rules a PAYE intermediary is treated as an employer. Late opt-outs Late opt-outs will only be accepted at the Commissioner’s discretion if one or more of the following applies: ▪ the employer did not supply the employee with an information pack within seven days of the employee starting new employment ▪ IR did not send the product disclosure statement for the default KiwiSaver scheme to which the employee was allocated ▪ the employer did not supply the product disclosure statement for the employee’s chosen KiwiSaver scheme, if the employer had a preferred scheme provider in place ▪ events outside of the employee’s control meant that the opt-out notice could not be given within the time limit for opting out and, in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is reasonable that a late opt-out notice be accepted, or ▪ a mistake has occurred and the person does not meet the requirements. The Commissioner may accept a late opt-out notice if it is received by the Commissioner or employer up to 92 days after the date when IR receives an employee’s first contribution. If a late opt-out notice is received and the Commissioner does not accept it, the notice will be treated as if it were an application for a savings suspension (before 1 April 2019, a contributions holiday), if the person is eligible to apply for one. See ¶29-245. If a savings suspension is granted in lieu of an opt-out, IR will not notify the employer named on the opt-out request. IR has issued a standard practice statement SPS 07/04, “Discretions to be exercised by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue under the KiwiSaver Act 2006”, which sets out the Commissioner’s practice in exercising some of her discretions under the KiwiSaver Act 2006, eg  accepting or declining late opt-outs or applications for savings suspension. SPS 07/04 was published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 6, July 2007 at 10. Invalid membership Special rules apply if a person’s enrolment was invalid and the KiwiSaver Act has been applied to the person by mistake. As soon as the mistake is discovered it must be notified to the Commissioner or KiwiSaver scheme provider. The person is treated as having met the requirements for an initial backdated validation period of up to 92 days after the mistake is notified. If during that initial period the person does meet the requirements to apply the KiwiSaver Act, the Commissioner will confirm the backdated validation. If not, the Commissioner will refund the contributions made, including interest. Minors who have been incorrectly enrolled into KiwiSaver may optout up until their 19th birthday. This does not apply to those who, either with the consent of their guardian (if still a minor) or independently (if aged 18), have subsequently contracted directly with a provider. With effect from 1 April 2020, where a person has been invalidly enrolled on the basis of not meeting the residence requirement, their membership will end on the day that their scheme provider discovers, or is notified about, the mistake. There will be no backdated validation in this situation and contributions will be refunded. Law: KIW ss 16–21, 59A–59D  ¶29-230 Contributions to KiwiSaver An employer is required to deduct contributions from an employee’s gross wages or salary from the first payday after the employee starts work. Unless the employee elects to go on a “savings suspension” (before 1 April 2019, a “contributions holiday”) (see ¶29-245), contributions will continue until the employee leaves service.  Employer contributions are subject to employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) and ESCT is required to be deducted from employer contributions made to a KiwiSaver scheme. See ¶29-420. Member contributions The default contribution rate for employees to KiwiSaver is 3% of an employee’s gross salary or wages, with an option for employees to contribute at a higher rate of 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% by notifying their employer. If an employee changes their rate, the new rate applies to the next payment of salary or wages that is calculated after the employer receives notice. ▸Note: Amendments have been enacted to allow employees to change their contribution rate by also notifying their scheme provider or the Commissioner. If the employee notifies their scheme provider, the provider will have to notify the Commissioner as soon as practicable. The Commissioner will have to notify each of the employee’s employers as soon as practicable after receiving notice from the employee or the provider. However, the amendments have a deferred application date of 1 April 2022 or an earlier date set by Order in Council. Gross salary or wages means “salary or wages” before deduction of tax. “Salary or wages” is generally given the same meaning in the KiwiSaver Act 2006 as in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007, except that certain pensions, accommodation benefits, income-tested benefits, benefits under employee share schemes, redundancy payments and living allowances are excluded. Extra pays are included in the KiwiSaver definition of “salary or wages” unless otherwise excluded or the amount of the extra pay is a redundancy payment. Parental leave payments and payments of compensation under the accident compensation legislation are also included, except when calculating the amount of an employer’s compulsory contribution (see below). Example:  Linda joined NZ Co in November 2017. She earns $500 per week before tax and other deductions. She has not opted out of KiwiSaver and has not given NZ Co notice requiring contributions at the higher rate of 8%. Using tax code “M”, PAYE would be $77.15 with KiwiSaver contributions of $15 per week (3%). Linda’s net pay would be $407.85 ($500 − $77.15 (tax) − $15 (KiwiSaver contribution)).  Inland Revenue (IR) provides KiwiSaver contribution calculations in the PAYE deduction tables (IR 340 and IR 341) and PAYE payroll specifications for employers to use. Additional contributions, above the 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% and 10% rates, can be made by employees directly to their KiwiSaver scheme providers from their tax-paid salary or wages, depending on the terms of the particular KiwiSaver scheme. Self-employed people and other people who are not employees may contract directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider and make contributions directly to a KiwiSaver account. If a member wants deductions to be made from paid parental leave payments, the member will need to provide IR with a KiwiSaver deduction notice asking IR to deduct KiwiSaver contributions from the paid parental leave payments. KiwiSaver contributions will not automatically be deducted from weekly ACC compensation. The member can, however, request the Accident Compensation Corporation to make KiwiSaver deductions by providing it with a KiwiSaver deduction notice (KS 2). Second jobs An employee who is a KiwiSaver member who starts a second job will have contributions deducted from his or her salary or wages in both the existing and new jobs. The employee cannot opt out of membership in his or her other job. However, the employee can apply for a savings suspension if the employee is eligible for this (see ¶29-245). The savings suspension may be for all jobs or just for those selected by the employer. An employee who has an existing job (and is not a KiwiSaver member) and starts a second job will be automatically enrolled in the  second job. Contributions will be deducted from the employee’s salary or wages in his or her second job (and any subsequent jobs that the employee starts) but will not be payable on salary or wages from his or her first job. Non-deduction notices for members post withdrawal age Members who have reached withdrawal age (superannuation qualification age) may choose to remain in their KiwiSaver scheme. Members who are still employed may continue to have their contributions deducted from their salary, or they may choose to stop making contributions. Members who wish to stop contributing to their KiwiSaver scheme after they reach withdrawal age must give their employer a “non-deduction notice” instructing the employer to cease deducting the contributions from their salary or wages. See s 112B. Employer contributions Contributions are required to be made by employers for an employee who: ▪ is aged 18 or more ▪ has not reached the age where they are entitled to withdraw funds from a KiwiSaver account ▪ has not withdrawn funds because of a life-shortening congenital condition (see ¶29-260) ▪ is paid salary or wages from which they are making contributions to their KiwiSaver scheme (or complying superannuation fund — see below), and ▪ is not a member of a defined benefit scheme (certain registered schemes existing before 17 May 2007). This requirement applies to employers that are resident in New Zealand for tax purposes (see ¶1-120 and ¶1-140), that carry on business through a fixed establishment in New Zealand or who choose to be subject to the KiwiSaver Act.  In addition to salary or wages Compulsory employer contributions are in addition to an employee’s gross salary or wages. Employers and employees may agree on how the compulsory employer contributions will be funded, but compulsory contributions must be paid in addition to an employee’s gross salary or wages when an employee becomes a new member, or existing members begin new employment and there are no contractual terms accounting for the amount of compulsory employer contributions. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 1, March 2009 at 36. The duty of good faith under s 4 of the Employment Relations Act 2000 applies to the parties to an employment relationship when they bargain any contractual terms relating to compulsory contributions and its associated matters. KiwiSaver employer contributions however must be paid on top of the minimum wage. In Faitala v Terranova Homes & Care Ltd (2012) 10 NZELC ¶79-017 the Employment Court held that it was unlawful for employees to be paid the minimum wage of $13.50 per hour including the company’s compulsory employer contribution. The mandatory requirements of the Minimum Wage Act 1983 were held to override s 101B of the KiwiSaver Act. That is, the ability to contract out of s 101B was not available when it conflicted with the Minimum Wage Act. The Court found that the Minimum Wage Act operated as a protective statute as one of its purposes was to protect vulnerable employees and it was described as a “minimum code”. This reasoning was endorsed by the Court of Appeal on appeal (Terranova Homes & Care Ltd v Faitala and Goff (2013) 10 NZELC ¶79-036). The contribution rate for employers is 3% of salary or wages. Amount of the contribution The amount of the compulsory employer contribution is calculated as: (payment of gross salary or wages × compulsory employer contribution rate) − other contributions − hybrid schemes amount  For the purposes of calculating the amount of compulsory employer contributions to be made by an employer to a KiwiSaver scheme, the KiwiSaver definition of “salary or wages” specifically excludes parental leave payments, ACC compensation payments and redundancy payments. “Redundancy payment” is given the same meaning as in the Income Tax Act. For the purposes of calculating the employee deductions and compulsory employer contributions to be made by an employer to a complying superannuation fund, the KiwiSaver definition of “salary or wages” specifically excludes bonuses, commissions and other amounts not included in an employee’s gross base salary or wages. Other contributions include voluntary employer contributions, employer superannuation contributions to certain superannuation schemes registered before 17 May 2007, and contributions to Crown schemes. Hybrid schemes amount is the amount for certain superannuation schemes registered before 17 May 2007 that have no other contributions for the period and retirement benefits are calculated by adding to the total employee’s contribution a percentage of those contributions five years after the employee first becomes a member. Complying superannuation fund A complying superannuation fund was a registered superannuation scheme that had been approved by the Financial Markets Authority (FMA) under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989 as operating under effectively the same rules as a KiwiSaver scheme, particularly in respect of lock-in, transfer and reporting rules. With effect from 1 December 2014, the Superannuation Schemes Act was incorporated into the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 and a complying superannuation fund is a scheme that is identified as a complying superannuation fund on the register of managed investment schemes (see s 6 of that Act). Law: KIW Pt 3, subparts 1, 3A, ss 4(1), 112B  ¶29-240 Deduction and payment of KiwiSaver contributions Deduction of employee KiwiSaver contributions and payment of compulsory employer contributions begin from the time a new employee commences work or the employer receives a deduction notice. If an employee later opts out of the scheme, any contributions already deducted or paid will have to be refunded. See ¶29-225. All employee and employer KiwiSaver contributions must be paid to Inland Revenue (IR) at the time the usual PAYE deductions are paid. See ¶3-020. Before 1 April 2019, the deductions had to be forwarded by the employer to IR along with the employer monthly schedule (EMS). The EMS and employer deductions form included fields for KiwiSaver employee contributions and employer contributions. However, with effect from 1 April 2019, changes to the provision of employee income information mean that employers no longer provide an employer monthly schedule, but rather provide the details of employer and employee KiwiSaver contributions as part of the employee income information requirements — see ¶3-023. This employee income information is now due before the due date for payment. From 1 April 2020, to improve IR’s ability to ensure the correct contribution amounts are being received and that they are taxed at the correct rate, employers must provide in their employment income information the amount of salary and wages a KiwiSaver deduction is made from for a new employee if there is a difference between amounts an employer must treat as gross earnings for calculating PAYE and amounts they must treat as salary and wages for calculating KiwiSaver employee and employer contributions. IR forwards employee contributions to an employee’s scheme provider as soon as practicable after receiving the employee income information that an employee contribution has been deducted (even where the amount has not yet been received by IR), meaning  employee contributions can be forwarded to scheme providers sooner than they otherwise would be. With effect from 1 April 2020, these provisions have been extended to allow IR to also pay employer contributions to scheme providers as soon as practicable after receiving employee income information indicating that an employer contribution has been made (even where the contribution amount has not been received by IR). It has been clarified that if a change occurs to the minimum employee KiwiSaver contribution rate that affects the contribution to be deducted from a payment of salary or wages, the rate to be applied to determine the amount of the contribution is the rate applying on the day on which the salary or wages are paid. In addition, the compulsory employer contribution rate to be applied if there is a change in that rate is the rate applying on the day on which the salary or wages are paid. The penalty provisions of the Tax Administration Act 1994 apply to late payments of KiwiSaver deductions to IR. See ¶14-047. IR will hold all contributions received for 62 days (before 1 April 2020, 92 days) after a member joins KiwiSaver before passing these on to the KiwiSaver provider. IR may hold further contributions if agreement has been reached with the provider on a minimum level of contributions that can be passed on. All contributions held by IR will earn interest, which will be paid net of tax. Employer contributions for employees in two or more funds Section 101FC of the KiwiSaver Act may exempt an employer from making a top-up contribution if an employee is a member of a KiwiSaver scheme and an existing employer superannuation fund. Provided that the amount of the contributions to the existing employer superannuation fund is calculated using a rate equal to or greater than the compulsory employer contribution rate, there is no additional contribution payable to the employee’s KiwiSaver fund. Grace period An employer is given a grace period for non-payment of compulsory employer contributions in certain circumstances. See s 101FB of the  KiwiSaver Act. Law: KIW Pt 3, Pt 4, subpart 3  ¶29-245 Savings suspension from KiwiSaver Except in cases of financial hardship, a savings suspension (before 1 April 2019, a contributions holiday) will be available to an employee only after he or she has been a member of KiwiSaver for more than 12 months. After 12 months as a KiwiSaver member, an employee can request a savings suspension for a minimum of 92 days and a maximum of one year (before 1 April 2019, five years). To request a savings suspension an employee must complete a KiwiSaver savings suspension request (KS 6). As soon as practicable after granting the request, IR must give notice: ▪ to the employee — confirming the beginning and end dates of the savings suspension ▪ to each relevant employer — advising a savings suspension has been granted and that the employer must stop making KiwiSaver deductions, and ▪ to the scheme provider — advising the suspension has been granted, the names of the relevant employers, and that deductions may not be made. One month before the end of the savings suspension, IR will notify the employer to restart making KiwiSaver deductions. Members can apply for a new savings suspension when an existing savings suspension has less than six months left to run. IR has issued a standard practice statement SPS 07/04, “Discretions to be exercised by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue under the KiwiSaver Act 2006”, which sets out the Commissioner’s practice in exercising some of his discretions under the KiwiSaver Act 2006, eg accepting or declining applications for savings suspensions on the  ground of financial hardship. SPS 07/04 was published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 6, July 2007 at 10. When an employee is granted a savings suspension, the requirement for employers to make compulsory contributions also ceases for the duration of the suspension. Law: KIW ss 102–114  ¶29-250 Government contribution for KiwiSaver ▸ Note: In the Officials’ Report to the second reading of the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2018–19, Modernising Tax Administration, and Remedial Matters) Bill, officials noted that the name “member tax credit” had caused some confusion and that, with effect from 1 April 2019, it would be renamed the “Government contribution” to improve understanding of KiwiSaver benefits. Officials stated that no legislative change was necessary. However, while both the phrases “member tax credit” and “Government contribution” are not used within the relevant legislation, the legislation continues to refer to the payment made as a “tax credit”. People who contribute to a KiwiSaver scheme (or a complying superannuation fund) are eligible for a tax credit that matches half the amount of their contribution to the scheme up to $521.43 a year ($10 per week). To obtain the maximum tax credit, a member must have contributed $1,042.86 in a year. The tax credit is available to KiwiSaver members regardless of their employment status. Employer contributions do not count for the purposes of the tax credit. To qualify for the tax credit, the KiwiSaver member must be between the ages of 18 and the age for eligible withdrawal from KiwiSaver (in most cases 65 years). Members are required to have a principal place of residence in New Zealand, subject to certain limited exceptions for Government employees or volunteers working abroad. In addition, with effect from 1 April 2020, they must not have made a withdrawal for a life-shortening congenital condition (see ¶29-260).  The tax credit will be claimed annually by the scheme provider on the member’s behalf and will be applied to the member’s KiwiSaver account. The amount payable will be calculated based on the “member credit year”, which means a year ending on 30 June. If a member changes provider during a member credit year, the payment will be split between the relevant scheme providers. In most cases the tax credit is paid by Inland Revenue directly to the provider. The tax credit is applied by the KiwiSaver provider to the investments that the member has been allocated in the scheme. Any tax credits paid by the Commissioner are deemed to be excluded income of the person deriving the payment (see s CX 50). The tax credit can only be withdrawn by the member in the case of death, serious illness, for a first home purchase or, with effect from 1 April 2020, in the case of a life-shortening congenital condition (see ¶29-260). The tax credit cannot be withdrawn for financial hardship or to meet a tax liability on foreign superannuation withdrawal. If a member permanently emigrates overseas and chooses to withdraw or transfer his or her KiwiSaver interest, generally, the nominal value of the tax credit must be repaid to the Government. Law: IT07 ss CX 50, MK 1(1), (3), MK 2–MK 8; TAA s 68C  ¶29-260 Withdrawal of savings from KiwiSaver Before 1 July 2019, generally, a member’s savings were locked in to KiwiSaver until the later of the member reaching the New Zealand superannuation qualification age (currently 65 years) and the date on which the person had been a member of a KiwiSaver scheme for five years. The five-year lock-in period was removed with effect from 1 July 2019. Members are able to withdraw their funds when they reach the New Zealand Superannuation age, regardless of how long they have been a member. Transitional provisions provide that over 60-yearolds who joined KiwiSaver before 1 July 2019 remain locked in for the duration of the five-year period, ensuring they are subject to the same conditions and entitlements as when they joined KiwiSaver.  Purchase of first home A member who has contributed to KiwiSaver (or a complying superannuation fund or a work-based superannuation scheme where the employer is exempt from automatic enrolment for three years) may be eligible to make a withdrawal towards the purchase of his or her first home. Any such withdrawal excludes a $1,000 balance that must be retained in the account to ensure the account is not closed. To qualify for the first home purchase withdrawal, the purchase must be the principal residence of the member or the member and his family. The member may also qualify for the Crown’s first home subsidy, which is administered by Housing New Zealand. Note that if a member has owned a home before, in some circumstances they may still be eligible to withdraw their savings to purchase a home. Such second-chance homeowners will be required to show they are in the same financial position as a first home buyer. Only a person’s assets and liabilities are considered for this. Significant financial hardship If a member is suffering or is likely to suffer significant financial hardship (defined in clause 11 of sch 1 to the KiwiSaver Act), the member may make an application to the manager (or trustees of restricted schemes) to withdraw all or part of his or her accumulation in the scheme. Any such withdrawal would exclude the Crown’s $1,000 start-up contribution (if relevant) and any Government contributions (formerly referred to as member tax credits) but may include interest (positive or negative) on that contribution. The manager must be satisfied that the member has explored and exhausted other reasonable alternative sources of funding. In addition, the manager may direct that the amount withdrawn be limited to that which, in their opinion, is required to alleviate the member’s particular hardship.  Serious illness A member may make an application for a withdrawal of the member’s accumulation where the member is suffering from a serious illness. Any such withdrawal may include the Crown’s $1,000 start-up contribution (if relevant) and any Government contributions. Serious illness means an injury, illness or disability that: ▪ results in the member being totally and permanently unable to engage in work for which he or she is suited by reason of experience, education or training or any combination of these things, or ▪ poses a serious and imminent risk of death. The manager (or trustees of a restricted scheme) may require medical and other evidence to support a member’s application for a withdrawal due to serious illness. Life-shortening congenital conditions From 1 April 2020, members with life-shortening congenital conditions may apply to withdraw their savings when they retire, as this is likely to be before they reach the existing age of eligibility to withdraw (ie the qualification age for New Zealand superannuation, currently 65 years). Conditions identified as life-shortening congenital conditions will be listed in regulations, but certain non-listed conditions that exist for a person from their date of birth and are likely to reduce the person’s life expectancy below 65 years are also eligible for withdrawal under this category. All members have to provide a medical certificate issued by a medical practitioner to verify their eligibility to withdraw their savings. They also have to complete a statutory declaration that they understand that their KiwiSaver funds are to be released to them as if they had reached the New Zealand superannuation qualification age, and that after the withdrawal of the funds they will no longer be eligible to receive government contributions or compulsory employer contributions in relation to any continuing member’s contributions. A withdrawal on this basis may include the  Crown’s $1,000 start-up contribution (if relevant) and any Government contributions. Permanent emigration On permanent emigration from New Zealand, a member will be able to request the withdrawal of his or her accumulation from the scheme, with the exception of emigration to Australia (see ¶29-270). However, an application to the trustees or the manager (as the case may be) cannot be made any earlier than one year after the member’s permanent emigration. Alternatively, a member may, on permanent migration, request his or her accumulation to be transferred to a foreign superannuation scheme authorised under the KiwiSaver regulations. The regulations will be available once arrangements have been entered into with foreign countries. The manager of the scheme will require proof to their satisfaction of the member’s permanent emigration from New Zealand and that the member has resided at an overseas address at some time during the year following the member’s departure from New Zealand. Tax liability for foreign superannuation withdrawal Under the rules applying to most interests in foreign superannuation schemes, taxpayers are generally taxed on the receipt of lump sum withdrawals from such schemes, and this includes the withdrawal and reinvestment (ie transfer) of an interest from the foreign superannuation scheme to a New Zealand superannuation scheme, including KiwiSaver. See further at ¶5-317 and ¶26-125. Under the rules, a taxpayer who transfers from a foreign scheme to a KiwiSaver scheme is able to withdraw sufficient funds from the KiwiSaver scheme to pay the tax that arises on transfer, as well as any student loan repayment obligation that arises. The application for a withdrawal of funds must be made within two years from the end of the month in which the tax liability or student loan repayment liability of the member is assessed and must include a statutory declaration giving the relevant details of the foreign superannuation withdrawal, reinvestment and liability assessed.  The manager (or trustees of a restricted scheme) must make payment direct to Inland Revenue if their systems allow for payment to someone other than a member. In all cases, the manager (or trustees) is required to notify Inland Revenue of the details of any such withdrawal to meet tax or student loan repayment obligations. Law: KIW sch 1  ¶29-270 Trans-Tasman portability of KiwiSaver scheme Portability arrangements allow the trans-Tasman portability of KiwiSaver retirement savings. These rules allow the consolidation of retirement savings in both Australia and New Zealand to a person’s country of residence without a tax cost. Schedule 1 cl 14B of the KiwiSaver Act 2006 provides the mechanism by which amounts in a KiwiSaver scheme can be transferred to an Australian complying superannuation scheme (defined under Australian legislation as a superannuation scheme regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority). Members in a KiwiSaver scheme who permanently emigrate to Australia may apply to the trustees or the manager (as the case may be) to transfer all of their funds to a complying Australian superannuation scheme. The trans-Tasman portability rules mean that members in the KiwiSaver scheme are not able to withdraw any retirement savings in cash when permanently emigrating to Australia, unlike permanent emigration to other countries. Likewise, Australian-sourced retirement savings can be transferred to a KiwiSaver scheme when a person emigrates to New Zealand from Australia and will not be subject to tax at the point of entry. The source country rules will still apply to principal amounts of savings transferred. Accordingly, principal amounts transferred to New Zealand from Australia can be withdrawn at the Australian age of retirement of 60 years. Principal amounts transferred to Australia from New Zealand will only be able to be withdrawn at the age of 65. Other source country rules applying include New Zealand  Government contributions (formerly referred to as member tax credits) not being paid on savings transferred from Australia together with the housing initiatives (see above) also not applying to such savings. The transfer of savings under these rules is optional and as Australia and New Zealand have different tax rates applying to retirement savings, these should also be considered before savings are transferred. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes to amend the definition of “Australian complying superannuation scheme” to include the Australian Commissioner of Tax in their capacity as the holder of unclaimed superannuation money (USM). This would enable the direct transfer of New Zealanders’ Australian USM from the Australian Tax Office to a KiwiSaver scheme. The amendments will come into force on the same date as the required amendments to the Trans-Tasman Retirement Savings Portability Arrangement between New Zealand and Australia, but this is considered to be unlikely to be before late 2021 at the earliest. Law: IT07 s CW 29B  RETIREMENT SAVINGS SCHEMES ¶29-300 Background to retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) rules A tax regime came into effect from 1 April 2007 for contributions by certain companies and Māori authorities to approved retirement savings schemes for their shareholders or members. Contributions may be subject to retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT), which replaces income tax (and resident withholding tax) on retirement savings contributions. The rules also provide that contributions are not to be taken into account for social assistance purposes (see ¶12125).  Entities wanting to make contributions to retirement savings schemes must request the Commissioner’s approval to apply RSCT to those contributions. To obtain approval, the contributing entity and the retirement savings scheme must meet specified criteria. Generally, to be eligible for RSCT, the schemes must lock in the contributions until the shareholder or member’s retirement, although withdrawals may be allowed for specific events. The introduction of RSCT was consistent with the Government’s review of savings investment in New Zealand and the introduction of KiwiSaver and the portfolio investment entity regime. It was intended that RSCT would reduce the saver’s compliance costs and, accordingly, reduce barriers to savings. Before the introduction of RSCT, contributions to retirement savings schemes were subject to resident withholding tax (RWT). If an incorrect amount of RWT was deducted the saver was required to seek a refund or pay additional income tax. This required the saver to file a tax return. Further, the contributions formed part of the saver’s income for social assistance purposes. The introduction of RSCT was intended to make the tax treatment of contributions to retirement savings schemes more consistent with the tax treatment of employers’ contributions to superannuation schemes, fringe benefits and portfolio investment income. Law: IT07 subpart RH  ¶29-305 Eligibility to use RSCT rules Retirement scheme contributors Entities wanting to pay RSCT on contributions to retirement savings schemes must request approval from the Commissioner. To obtain the Commissioner’s approval, the contributing entity and the retirement savings scheme must meet specified criteria. Only certain entities are eligible to be approved as retirement scheme contributors. They are: ▪ companies (other than close companies)  ▪ widely-held unit trusts (see s YA 1, definition of “widely-held trust”), and ▪ Māori authorities. In addition, the person for whom the contribution is being made must be a shareholder, unitholder or member of the contributing entity. Retirement savings schemes An entity is eligible to be a retirement savings scheme if: ▪ the entity is a portfolio investment entity (see ¶29-110) ▪ distributions from the scheme are restricted until the saver reaches the retirement age specified in the scheme’s rules ▪ the saver is not permitted to make withdrawals before retirement, except for: □ the repayment of a student loan □ the payment of tertiary education fees and expenses □ the purchase of housing if the saver does not own a home □ withdrawals that would be allowed if the scheme were a KiwiSaver scheme (eg significant financial hardship, serious illness, permanent emigration) (see sch 1 of the KiwiSaver Act 2006), or □ any other withdrawals under the distribution rules that have been approved as being fair and reasonable by the Commissioner, and ▪ the scheme’s distribution rules have been approved by the Commissioner as being fair and reasonable, and include a rule that the scheme can request the saver to provide information to verify that a withdrawal complies with the rules. Law: IT07 ss RH 3, RH 4  ¶29-310 Retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) Eligible entities that make a retirement scheme contribution to an approved retirement savings scheme must pay retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) to Inland Revenue (IR). RSCT is deducted at the tax rate of the person for whom the contribution is being made (ie the individual saver’s tax rate) by the contributor from the amount of the contribution before it is paid to the retirement savings scheme. However, the contributor can appoint the scheme to act as its agent to make the deductions on its behalf. The contributor (or the scheme, acting as the contributor’s agent) is obliged to collect retirement scheme prescribed rates from individual savers to determine the rate at which RSCT should be deducted from the contributions. When the contributor is notified of the saver’s tax file number and appropriate retirement scheme prescribed rate (see below), then the rate will apply to the contribution under sch 1 pt D cl 7. Retirement scheme prescribed rates The retirement scheme prescribed rates are defined in s YA 1 by reference to the rates set out in sch 6, Table 2 (Prescribed rates: PIE investments and retirement scheme contributions). The retirement scheme prescribed rates for individual savers are: ▪ 10.5% if: □ the individual saver’s taxable income in either of the two previous income years was $14,000 or less □ the saver is a non-resident, the contributor is a Māori authority and the distribution is $200 or less, or □ the saver is a non-resident, the contributor is a Māori authority and the saver provides the Māori authority with a notice under s 28C of the Tax Administration Act 1994, including their IRD number  ▪ 17.5% if the individual saver’s taxable income in either of the previous two income years was more than $14,000 but not more than $48,000 ▪ 30% if the individual saver’s taxable income in either of the previous two income years was more than $48,000 but not more than $70,000 ▪ from 1 April 2021, 33% if the individual saver’s taxable income in either of the previous two income years was more than $70,000 but not more than $180,000 ▪ 0% if the saver is a non-resident and the contribution is nonresident passive income ▪ 33% (39% from 1 April 2021) otherwise. Each individual saver should notify the contributor of his or her prescribed rate. Any such notification should include the saver’s tax file number. If no prescribed rate is notified, RSCT is to be deducted at the default rate of 33% (39% from 1 April 2021). Any retirement scheme contribution paid for the benefit of a person is excluded income of that person. See ¶29-320. Payment of RSCT Payments of RSCT should be made to IR by the 20th of the month following the month in which the deduction is made. Payments to IR should be accompanied by a statement showing the amount of the contribution, the amount of RSCT paid (other than by way of imputation credits or Māori authority credits (see ¶29-315)) and any other particulars required by the Commissioner. If a contributor (or the retirement scheme, if acting as the contributor’s agent) fails to deduct RSCT from a contribution for a person, the unpaid tax becomes a debt payable to the Commissioner by the contributor, due on the 20th of the month following the month in which the contribution was made. Certain provisions of the RWT rules relating to the non-payment of tax are deemed to apply to the non-payment  of RSCT. See s RA 24. It is an offence to knowingly not deduct RSCT — see ¶14-250. The Commissioner is empowered to make assessments of the amount of a retirement scheme contribution on which, in the Commissioner’s opinion, RSCT should be imposed. See s 98B of the Tax Administration Act. Law: IT07 ss BE 1(5B), RA 6B, RA 10, RA 15, RA 24, RH 2, RH 5, YA 1, sch 1 pt D cl 7, sch 6, Table 2; TAA ss 28C, 47B, 98B  ¶29-315 RSCT — imputation and Māori authority credits To the extent that a retirement scheme savings contribution is a distribution of profits to a shareholder, unitholder or member, imputation credits or Māori authority credits (as appropriate) may be attached to the contribution, and used to meet the contributor’s retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) liability in respect of the contribution. If the amount of imputation or Māori authority credits attached to the contribution exceeds the RSCT liability, the excess is treated as a credit to the individual saver, and can be used to reduce the individual saver’s overall tax liability or be carried forward. If an excess occurs, the contributor (or the scheme, if acting as the contributor’s agent) must give notice to the individual saver within 30 days showing the amount of the excess credit. The contributing company must provide a shareholder dividend statement to its shareholder when it attaches imputation credits to a retirement scheme contribution. See ¶17-090. Similarly, a Māori authority must give notice to a member of any taxable Māori authority distribution paid to a retirement savings scheme as a retirement scheme contribution. See ¶24-335. Law: IT07 ss LE 7B, LO 2B; TAA ss 29(1), 31(1)  ¶29-320 RSCT — excluded income and tax credits  A retirement scheme contribution is excluded income to the individual saver to the extent that the contribution is: ▪ money ▪ an amount of imputation credit or Māori authority credit used by the contributor to meet the retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT) liability in respect of the contribution — see ¶29-315. The contribution will not be excluded income if: ▪ an individual saver provides a lower RSCT rate than his or her actual rate, or the individual includes the contribution in his or her income tax return, or ▪ the saver is a non-resident, and the contribution is non-resident passive income. A tax credit is available to the saver under s LB 6 if an amount of RSCT was deducted from a contribution that was not excluded income. Where RSCT is deducted from a contribution for a nonresident, the amount of RSCT deducted is treated, to the extent applicable, as being non-resident withholding tax in respect of that contribution. Any remaining amount of RSCT is treated as a tax credit under s LB 6. A retirement scheme contribution is also excluded income of the retirement savings scheme. Law: IT07 ss CX 50B, LB 6, RF 16  ¶29-325 Record-keeping for retirement scheme contributions and RSCT The contributing entity is required to keep records of every contribution made to a retirement savings scheme, details of the recipient and the occasion of making the contribution. The contributing entity (or the retirement savings scheme if it has been appointed to act as the contributor’s agent) is required to send  an annual reconciliation statement to Inland Revenue showing the retirement scheme contributions subject to RSCT made for the year, the total RSCT liability, the amount of RSCT deducted and the imputation or Māori authority credits used to pay the RSCT liability. The reconciliation statement should also include details for each person who received a contribution, including non-residents and details of contributions paid for non-residents. The annual reconciliation statement must be received by the Commissioner on or before the end of the second month following the end of the income year. When a retirement scheme contributor or a retirement savings scheme withholds an amount of RSCT from a contribution (other than by way of imputation credit or Māori authority credit), the contributor or scheme must provide the Commissioner with a statement in an acceptable form no later than the 20th of the month after the month in which the amount was withheld. The statement must show the amount of the contribution, the amount of RSCT and any other particulars required by the Commissioner. Law: TAA ss 22(2)(cb), 47B, 48B  SUPERANNUATION SCHEMES ¶29-400 Categories of superannuation scheme Superannuation scheme A superannuation scheme is defined in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007 as: ▪ a trust or unit trust established by its trust deed mainly for the purposes of providing retirement benefits to natural persons or paying benefits to superannuation funds, or ▪ a non-resident company (not being a unit trust) established mainly for the purpose of providing retirement benefits to members (who are individuals) or relatives of members, or  ▪ an arrangement constituted under statute (other than the New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Act 2001) mainly for the purpose of providing retirement benefits to natural persons, or ▪ an arrangement constituted under the legislation of a foreign country, territory, state or local authority mainly for the purpose of providing retirement benefits to natural persons (other than retirement benefits resembling New Zealand superannuation), and ▪ for a superannuation scheme that is a trust, means the trustees of the scheme. Superannuation funds A “superannuation fund” is defined to mean a retirement scheme within the meaning of s 6(1) of the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013. For a retirement scheme that is a trust, the definition includes the trustees of the trust. A “retirement scheme” under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 includes a KiwiSaver scheme or a superannuation scheme registered under the register of managed investment schemes. Also included within the definition are workplace savings schemes and Schedule 3 schemes (broadly, these are single person self-managed superannuation schemes). The Financial Markets Authority maintains a number of registers including the managed investment schemes register and the complying superannuation funds register. The statutory governance rules for retirement schemes that are managed investment products are in Pt 4, subpart 2 of the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013. Superannuation funds are treated, for tax purposes, as complying trusts. In brief, a trust with a settlor resident in New Zealand is taxable on all of its investment earnings. A trust that has always been so taxable is termed a “complying trust”, and any benefit paid  by it, whether by pension or lump sum payment, is tax free in the beneficiary’s hands. Following on from the changes brought about by the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013, a complying superannuation fund is a superannuation scheme or workplace savings scheme that is identified as a complying superannuation fund on the register of managed investment schemes. Non-registered superannuation schemes Non-registered superannuation schemes fall within the meaning of unit trust and, for tax purposes, are treated as companies. See ¶24190. Law: IT07 ss HC 10(1)(b), YA 1  ¶29-410 Superannuation funds — income tax treatment Generally contributions to superannuation funds are made from an individual’s after-tax income. Superannuation funds are treated, for tax purposes, as complying trusts. The income of the fund is taxed at 33% and distributions to the investor are not taxed. A superannuation fund that meets certain criteria can elect to enter the portfolio investment entity (PIE) regime and become a PIE. As a PIE, the superannuation fund will no longer be taxed as a trust. For the tax rules applying to PIEs, see ¶29-100 et seq. The tax rate for widely-held superannuation funds, non-registered superannuation schemes and PIEs is 28%. The tax rate for superannuation funds that are not widely-held is 33% (this is on the basis that such funds are close substitutes for private trusts). For the distinction between superannuation funds and superannuation schemes see ¶29-400. A “widely-held superannuation fund” is one that satisfies the investor membership requirements for an entity other than a company in the PIE rules (s HM 14) and one or more of the paragraphs of the definition of a “public unit trust” (see s YA 1 and ¶24-192). In effect, this means that a superannuation fund would  generally have to have at least 20 members to be eligible for the reduced tax rate. Taxation of contributions Members of a superannuation fund cannot claim a deduction from their personal taxable income for superannuation contributions. Contributions are generally made from a member’s after-tax income. Where an employer makes a superannuation contribution for an employee, the employer is usually entitled to a deduction for the amount of that contribution. There is also a specific timing rule for the deduction of contributions made within 63 days of the employer’s income year. See further at ¶10-292. Further, the employer’s contribution may be subject to employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) (see ¶29-420) or may give rise to an FBT liability for the employer (see ¶21-540). An employer’s superannuation contribution is excluded income of the employee and of the superannuation scheme (see ¶5-755). Taxation of fund income The trustees of superannuation funds return trust income on the same basis as any other trustee under the Income Tax Act 2007. However, there are specific exceptions and a number of measures that affect the way in which a superannuation fund may be taxed under the trust regime. For example, a superannuation fund is liable to tax irrespective of the settlor’s residence. Only trustee income is derived by a superannuation fund. This is because the definition of “beneficiary income” excludes income derived by a trustee of a superannuation fund. See s HC 6(2). Costs incurred with respect to the developing, marketing, selling, promoting and advertising for members of a superannuation fund may be deducted pursuant to s DV 1. Concessionary rules in s DV 2 apply to enable a superannuation fund that only invests in another superannuation fund and that does not have any taxable income to transfer its management expenses to the “master” superannuation fund. The “master fund” is then entitled to deduct those expenses against its taxable income.  Specifically excluded from the trustee income of a superannuation fund is any amount derived from investing funds in a policy of life insurance offered or entered into in New Zealand. See s CX 40. Taxation of distributions All benefits paid from superannuation funds are exempt from tax, irrespective of whether they are paid in pension or lump sum form and irrespective of whether or not the beneficiary is a New Zealand resident. This applies to all benefits payable as a result of resignation, death or disablement of a member, and not just those benefits payable on the member’s retirement. Law: IT07 ss CX 40, CX 49, DC 7, DV 1, DV 2, HC 24–HC 26, HC 29, HC 33, YA 1, sch 1 pt A cls 3, 6  ¶29-420 Employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) Employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) is payable, subject to certain exemptions, on employer cash contributions to a superannuation scheme that meets the definition of a superannuation fund (see ¶29-400). ESCT is imposed on a progressive scale on employer superannuation cash contributions or KiwiSaver contributions that exceed the exemption threshold level. The applicable rates and thresholds are set out at ¶50-078. The ESCT deduction rate is: ▪ the employee’s relevant progressive rate based on the total salary or wages and employer superannuation cash contributions paid to the employee in the previous year, or ▪ 33% (39% from 1 April 2021), if the employer elects that rate and the contribution is to a defined benefit fund, or if the contribution is made by the employer, or another person, for a past employee or employees.  It has been clarified that if a rate or threshold change occurs that affects the amount of an employer’s superannuation cash contribution, the rates and thresholds to be applied to determine the amount of tax to be withheld are those applying on the day on which the PAYE income payment to which the contribution relates is paid. If the PAYE rules treat a payment as paid on a different date from when it is actually paid, the relevant rates and thresholds are those on the date when the payment is treated as being made. Where an employer’s superannuation cash contribution is made that is not tied to a particular PAYE income payment, the relevant rates and thresholds are those in force on the date on which the contribution is paid to the superannuation fund or under the KiwiSaver Act 2006 to Inland Revenue (whichever applies). Only the net amount of the employer’s cash contribution, after the deduction of ESCT, is paid into the superannuation fund on behalf of the employee. Employees may, with their employer’s consent, elect for some or all of their superannuation cash contribution to be treated as salary or wages and subject to the PAYE rules. The employee’s election is valid until they notify their employer of its revocation. If an employer makes a non-monetary contribution to a superannuation scheme on behalf of an employee, the contribution is generally subject to fringe benefit tax (FBT). See ¶21-540. Employer contributions to a superannuation scheme that is not a superannuation fund may be liable to FBT. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 1, July 1994 at 1, and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 7, December 1994 at 21. A PAYE intermediary is also subject to the ESCT rules for any superannuation cash contribution payments made for an employer’s employees. Law: IT07 ss BE 1(5), RA 5(1)(c), RD 64–RD 71, sch 1 pt D cl 1  ¶29-425 ESCT — payment date  Employers or PAYE intermediaries must deduct employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) and pay it to Inland Revenue (IR) on the same basis as PAYE. However, ESCT is added to PAYE when determining whether PAYE and ESCT deductions have to be paid once or twice a month. If the total PAYE and ESCT deductions were under $500,000 in the previous year, the employer has to pay the deductions to IR only once each month. Otherwise, deductions must be paid to IR twice each month. The following are the payment due dates for employers or PAYE intermediaries who have to pay PAYE and ESCT deductions to IR twice each month: ▪ deductions made between the 1st and 15th of the month are due by the 20th of that month, and ▪ deductions made between the 16th and the end of the month are due by the 5th of the following month (or 15 January where December is the month of deduction). If an employer or PAYE intermediary has to pay PAYE and ESCT deductions to IR only once each month, all PAYE and ESCT deductions made during the month are due by the 20th of the following month. Details of ESCT deductions must be included in the employment income information provided to IR (see ¶3-023). An employer or PAYE intermediary who fails to pay any ESCT owing by due date is liable to the same penalties and fines that apply for missed or late PAYE deductions. ESCT that is due and payable on employer superannuation cash contributions made in an income year is deductible in that income year. The timing of the deduction is prescribed by s EF 2. See ¶10292. Law: IT07 ss DB 1(2)(c), EF 2, RA 15, RD 4, RD 22; TAA s 47  ¶29-435 Superannuation schemes and family assistance  For the purposes of calculating family scheme income (ie determining assistance for low-income households), the Commissioner is empowered to include in income any distributions received from a superannuation scheme. Such a distribution may be apportioned when the distribution is received by an employee in the current or preceding two income years, the employee continues to be employed at least one month after the distribution and the employer has made a contribution in the year of distribution. However, s MB 5 does not apply to a person receiving a distribution from a superannuation scheme on or after his or her retirement if the employer contributed to the superannuation scheme or if it is a KiwiSaver scheme or complying superannuation fund. As a result, an employee cannot reduce his or her income to a level whereby the employee would qualify for a family scheme tax credit. Law: IT07 s MB 5  ¶29-445 Employee benefit funds Some employers operate funds (not being superannuation schemes) designed to provide individual personal benefits to their employees. Such funds often take the form of welfare funds that make up the salary of employees who are absent from work for health reasons. Many such funds assist employees to meet the costs of medical, dental and optical services. The Commissioner has complete discretion to allow as a deduction the whole or any part of an employer’s contributions to such benefit funds. No deduction is allowed unless the fund has been established or the payment has been made in a manner that fully secures the rights of employees to receive the benefits. An employer who wishes to obtain a deduction should send full details to the Commissioner, outlining the benefits to be provided for the employees and the means adopted to secure the rights of the employees to those benefits. Law: IT07 s DC 6  DUTY Introduction to duties  ¶30-010  Gift Duty  ¶30-125  Cheque Duty  ¶30-265  Approved Issuer Levy  ¶30-300  Gaming Duty  ¶30-345  ¶30-010 Introduction to duties A duty may generally be seen as a tax on capital, rather than income, because it is commonly fixed by reference to the principal amounts involved. In addition to providing a significant means of revenue for the Government, there is often a social policy intent behind duties legislation. Estate duty, for example, was introduced as a means for preventing the accumulation of wealth in the hands of those who had not earned it. The original purpose of gift duty was to protect estate duty. However, it was overtaken by other developments and rendered obsolete. The assessment and collection of duties is administered by Inland Revenue. Cheque duty was imposed on bills of exchange under the Stamp and Cheque Duties Act 1971 before 1 July 2014. Duty is also imposed on the winnings of gaming and casino operators, lottery organisers and race clubs under the Gaming Duties Act 1971.  GIFT DUTY ¶30-125 Gift duty abolished from 1 October 2011 Gift duty was abolished for dispositions of property made on or after 1 October 2011. The Estate and Gift Duties Act 1968 remained  effective for dispositions of property before that date. For commentary on gift duty for dispositions before 1 October 2011, please refer to CCH, New Zealand Master Tax Guide 2012.  ¶30-126 Issues arising from the abolition of gift duty With the abolition of gift duty, the making of a gift has become more flexible. However, a gift can give rise to a number of issues that can result in adverse consequences for the donor. Before a gift is made, consideration should be given to the following issues: ▪ income tax implications ▪ financial arrangements rules ▪ creditor protection ▪ relationship property ▪ residential care subsidies ▪ documentation, and ▪ laws in foreign jurisdictions. The following income tax and GST implications arising from the abolition of gift duty should be considered: ▪ The abolition of gift duty does not have any impact on the income tax anti-avoidance rules. As has always been the case, a gift may be deemed to be part of a wider arrangement of tax avoidance under s BG 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. ▪ When a gift is made, a specific rule in the Income Tax Act deems there to be a disposal and acquisition at market value. As a result, the gifting of tax base property may give rise to income tax implications such as depreciation recovery income.  ▪ The gifting of shares can give rise to a breach in shareholder continuity for the purposes of carry forward losses and imputation credits. ▪ Section 10(3) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 treats the associated supply of goods and services as if they were for market value where there is no fully adequate consideration. Therefore, the provision of goods and services as gifts may give rise to GST consequences where the donor is GST registered. Financial arrangements rules The debt that arises from the sale and debt-back mechanism adopted to avoid gift duty is a financial arrangement. A loan that is interest-free and repayable upon demand is an excepted financial arrangement to the lender. This means that no income accrues to the lender from the arrangement: see s EW 5(10). However, from the borrower’s perspective, a loan is subject to the financial arrangements rules. Where a debt is forgiven, the rules that apply to financial arrangements provide that income can accrue to the borrower. However, these rules do not apply where the debt is forgiven in consideration of natural love and affection. Where the debtor is a trustee, natural persons are able to forgive debts owed to them by the trustee without income tax consequences if the trust was established mainly to benefit “a natural person for whom the creditor has a natural love and affection” and/or a charity that is registered with the Charities Commission: see s EW 50. Where, however, trustee debts have been forgiven, and the trustees of the trust subsequently make distributions to persons other than those for whom the creditor has natural love and affection or registered charities, such distributions will be income to the trustees in the year in which the distributions are made to the extent that the distributions do not exceed the amounts of the debts forgiven: see s EW 50 and ¶6-420. Following the abolition of gift duty, the limitations on beneficiaries that previously applied to avoid financial arrangement income no  longer apply. This means that if assets are gifted directly to trustees of a trust where no gifting programme has been in place, there is no requirement to limit the classes of beneficiaries, as had previously been the case. Creditor protection Before a gift is made, the solvency of the donor should be considered. This is because there are two main pieces of legislation that provide protection to creditors and may cause gifts to be clawed back in certain circumstances. Section 346 of the Property Law Act 2007 contains provisions that allow for gifts to be clawed back where a creditor has been prejudiced. In particular, it applies to dispositions made after 31 December 2007 by a debtor with intent to prejudice creditors, or made by way of gift, or without receiving reasonably equivalent value in exchange, in the following circumstances: ▪ the debtor (donor) was insolvent at the time, or became insolvent as a result, of making the disposition ▪ the debtor was engaged, or was about to engage, in a business or transaction for which the remaining assets of the debtor were, given the nature of the business or transaction, unreasonably small, or ▪ the debtor intended to incur, or believed or reasonably should have believed, that the debtor would incur, debts beyond the debtor’s ability to pay. Subpart 6 of Pt 6 of the Property Law Act empowers the courts to set aside property dispositions where there was an intention to prejudice the interests of a creditor-applicant. The Insolvency Act 2006 applies where a donor has become bankrupt. Any gift made by the donor within the two years before the bankruptcy can be cancelled by the Official Assignee: see s 204. In addition, gifts made between two and five years before bankruptcy can also be set aside if the bankrupt was unable to pay his or her  debts: see s 205. The onus is on the bankrupt to prove solvency without the aid of the property gifted. Section 292 of the Companies Act 1993 gives the Official Assignee similar powers but over shorter time frames (six months and two years). Relationship property With the abolition of gift duty, it is easier for a person to transfer property into trusts to defeat the interests of his or her spouse. However, a spouse may be entitled to compensation under the Property (Relationships) Act 1976 where his or her claim has been defeated by the disposition of property. Under that Act, the court can make an order for a person who has received the property otherwise than in good faith to transfer the property to any person that the court directs or to pay the difference between the value of the property and the consideration paid (if any): see s 44. Any significant gifts of relationship property should be recorded in a s 21 of the Property (Relationships) Act agreement if the gift is being made in fulfilment of relationship property rights. The possibility of claims under the Family Proceedings Act 1980 should also be taken into account. Residential care subsidy Entitlement to the residential care subsidy is determined in accordance with the Residential Care and Disability Support Services Act 2018 (previously the Social Security Act 1964 and the Social Security (Long-term Residential Care) Regulations 2005). The legislation is administered by Work and Income New Zealand (WINZ), the service delivery arm of the Ministry of Social Development. The gifting period commences five years before the date of the means assessment. The Residential Care and Disability Support Services Act has means-testing provisions for both assets and income. Sections 39 and 40 state that where a person (or the person’s spouse or partner)  applies for a means assessment, and that person has “directly or indirectly deprived himself or herself of any income or property”, the chief executive has a discretion to assess the person as if the deprivation has not occurred. Instances that will qualify as deprivation of assets include any gifts that exceed $27,000 in any 12-month period before the five-year gifting period. There is no time limit on the Ministry of Social Development’s discretion to consider adding back assets that applicants have divested before the commencement of the five-year gifting period (unlike the five-year clawback on “allowable gifts” of up to $6,500). A Court of Appeal decision means that gifting by a person’s spouse can be taken into account when assessing that person’s entitlement to residential care subsidies (Bridgford v Chief Executive of the Ministry of Social Development [2013] NZCA 410). In that case a wife and her husband had set up a family trust in 1987 and made gifts of $27,000 each per year between 1987 and 2004. In 2009, the wife moved into a rest-home and her application for a residential care subsidy was declined due to her assets considerably exceeding the limit for eligibility. All gifts made by the wife and her husband collectively in excess of $27,000 per year were counted back as personal assets. The Court of Appeal found that for the purpose of the exemption for gifts in the Social Security Act 1964, the exemption was limited to a combined sum for both the applicant and their spouse or partner of $27,000 pa. Because the regulations focus on deprivation of assets by the applicant, it does not matter that these assets have changed legal ownership. There is no need to look behind a trust or to show that the applicant has retained the effective control or enjoyment of the transferred assets. Simply the fact that the applicant has transferred his or her assets may allow them to be brought back into means testing. Documentation Proper documentation should still be kept to record the nature of gifts made, regardless of the fact that gift statements are no longer  required to be filed from 1 October 2011. Gifts should be recorded in a deed of gift. The reasons for making the gift should also be documented, given that the clawback provisions outlined above have become more prevalent. Trustees are still required to keep a record of all forgiveness of debt and distributions to beneficiaries over the life of the trust: s 22B of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Laws in foreign jurisdictions Although gift duty is no longer an issue from a New Zealand perspective, gifting laws in foreign jurisdictions should be considered where the donor is also subject to the laws of a foreign jurisdiction.  CHEQUE DUTY ¶30-265 Cheque duty repealed from 1 July 2014 Cheque duty was repealed from 1 July 2014. For commentary on cheque duty before 1 July 2014, please refer to CCH, New Zealand Master Tax Guide 2014.  APPROVED ISSUER LEVY ¶30-300 Approved issuer levy Overview of approved issuer levy Approved issuers are able to pay interest to non-residents without deducting non-resident withholding tax (NRWT). See ¶26-450. Approved issuers are required to pay a levy for the right to issue securities that are subject to the approved issuer regime. The levy is calculated at a rate of 2¢ for every dollar of interest paid on the security. The levy is a charge on the payer and is not deducted from the interest paid to the non-resident lender. If the cost of the levy is to be recovered from the recipient, it must be shown as a fee or  charge. A person other than the approved issuer can pay the levy for the approved issuer. For a zero-rate of NRWT to apply in respect of interest paid by an issuer to an overseas lender: ▪ the issuer must apply and be approved as an approved issuer (see ¶30-310) ▪ the security in respect of which the interest is paid must be registered with the Commissioner (see ¶30-320), and ▪ the approved issuer levy must be paid in respect of every dollar of interest paid (see ¶30-330). The approved issuer levy option is not available where: ▪ the interest payments are made to non-residents who are engaged in business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, because they are excluded from the NRWT rules ▪ the interest payments are derived jointly by two or more persons and at least one of those persons is a New Zealand resident ▪ the interest is derived by a person associated with the approved issuer (unless the approved issuer is a member of a New Zealand banking group) (see ¶16-225 for discussion of the associated persons concept) ▪ the interest relates to related-party debt. Interest payments that do not satisfy the conditions for zero-rating are subject to NRWT at the full rate. The Debt Management Office (a government agency) pays the 2% approved issuer levy for non-residents holding government securities that are covered by the regime. Thus the full amount of interest due in respect of government securities is paid without any deductions.  Approved issuer levy at the rate of 0% may apply to certain qualifying bonds. See ¶30-326. Deductibility The levy will be tax deductible if the New Zealand borrower has incurred the expense and the general permission for deductibility is satisfied. Commercial bills and anti-avoidance Section GB 26 includes, as income of a person, the redemption payment in cases where a non-resident disposes of a commercial bill to a resident immediately before maturity of the bill. The section is a specific anti-avoidance provision aimed at preventing arrangements that use commercial bills to avoid NRWT or approved issuer levy. See ¶33-144. Law: IT07 ss GB 26, RF 12; SCD ss 86F, 86I, 86IC, 86J  ¶30-310 Approved issuer status A person becomes an approved issuer by notifying the Commissioner that they wish to have approved issuer status. This can be done through myIR secure online services at the Inland Revenue’s website. Applications can also still be made using form IR 396. A person also becomes an approved issuer if they are treated as an approved issuer by the Commissioner because they have paid interest under a security and: ▪ the security is a notional loan from a New Zealand branch of a foreign bank (see ¶30-322) and NRWT was not withheld from the interest, or ▪ an amount of interest was apportioned to a New Zealand source under s YD 5(4) of the Income Tax Act 2007 from money lent outside New Zealand to a New Zealand resident borrower for an offshore branch through which the borrower lends money to  another New Zealand resident and NRWT was not withheld from the interest. In these cases, the security is treated as a registered security. A borrower elects to pay approved issuer levy in relation to a particular security, by either being or becoming an approved issuer, by applying to register the security, and by paying the levy for the security. A borrower will be eligible to elect to pay approved issuer levy for the purposes of an exemption under a double tax agreement, as well as for the purposes of the NRWT rules. The Commissioner may revoke a person’s approved issuer status at a particular time if the Commissioner considers the person has been responsible for serious default or neglect in complying with their tax obligations under any of the Inland Revenue Acts in the two-year period leading up to that time. Approvals can also be revoked at the request of the issuer, unless the issuer is an approved issuer because they are being treated as one by the Commissioner. The Commissioner must notify the person of a revocation. Despite revocation, a person continues to have approved issuer status for the purposes of the NRWT rules, the approved issuer levy rules, and an exemption under a double tax agreement, for a payment of interest made after the date of revocation for money lent to the person under a registered security while the person was an approved issuer and before the date of revocation. All enquiries relating to approved issuer levy should be directed to Inland Revenue’s Non-resident Centre. Law: TAA s 32M  ¶30-320 Approved issuer — registration of securities Approved issuers must register the debt instruments they issue by sending a completed registration form IR 397 to Inland Revenue (IR). Once the Commissioner is satisfied that the security being registered relates to money lent to an approved issuer, the  transaction will be registered, and the approved issuer will be notified in writing within 20 working days after receipt of the application. Notional loans from New Zealand branches of foreign banks (see ¶30-322) and transactions involving money lent where the issuer is treated as an approved issuer by the Commissioner (see ¶30-310) are treated by the Commissioner as registered securities. Late registration of securities The registration of a security or class of securities takes effect from the date on which the Commissioner receives the application for registration from the approved issuer. The Commissioner does not have the discretion to alter the date of registration if an approved issuer fails to register the security but pays the approved issuer levy as required. Any interest paid to a non-resident before the security is registered must have non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) deducted at the usual rate. If the approved issuer registers a security later, only interest paid to the non-resident from the date of registration is eligible to be subject to the approved issuer levy. Interest paid before the registration date continues to be subject to NRWT. See the Commissioner’s policy statement in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 5, November 1995 at 16. Law: SCD ss 86F, 86G, 86H  ¶30-322 Notional loan by a foreign bank A foreign bank may make a notional loan to its New Zealand branch that is recognised for the purposes of the NRWT rules and approved issuer levy (AIL): s FG 2. Notional loan A foreign bank may carry on business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand. The New Zealand branch may receive funds from its head office and record the transaction as a loan in its accounting records. If so, the branch is treated as having  received a loan and is entitled to a deduction for the interest payable under the notional loan. Any repayment of the notional loan is treated as an appropriate reduction to the loan. The notional loan is confined to funds provided by the head office. It does not include funding provided to the branch that is sourced from New Zealand. The recognition of a notional loan is available only for a registered bank. In the absence of the statutory provisions, a funding arrangement between a head office and a branch would be unable to be recognised. The arrangement is internal within the one legal person and so there would not be two parties eligible to be the lender and the borrower. See Max Factor and Co v FC of T 84 ATC 4060. Notional interest Amounts treated as an expense under the notional loan are treated as interest that is non-resident passive income. For each income year the expense is treated as having been paid by the branch as at the end of the third month following the branch’s balance date. The deemed payment of interest is subject to AIL. This is a mandatory treatment of the interest and so the branch must register as an approved issuer for AIL purposes. Alternatively, it is possible for the branch to pay NRWT. That is likely to be the more expensive approach on the assumption that the NRWT would not be fully creditable for the head office (because the tax credit would be proportionate to net rather than gross interest income). Application The notional loan provisions commenced on 30 March 2017. For funding that had been made available to a New Zealand branch before that date, commencement of the regime was deferred until the 2019–20 income year. Law: IT07 ss FG 1–FG 3; SCD s 86IC  ¶30-325 Application of approved issuer levy A payment of interest for the purposes of the NRWT rules of the Income Tax Act 2007, s 86J of the Stamp and Cheque Duties Act  1971 and an exemption under a double tax agreement, may be made by an approved issuer or on the approved issuer’s behalf (such as by a nominee company) at a zero-rate of NRWT on the registered securities. To access the zero rate, the interest is treated as paid to the non-resident lender only when the approved issuer levy of 2% of the value of the interest is paid by or on behalf of the approved issuer. The payment of approved issuer levy is compulsory in relation to interest paid under a notional loan to a New Zealand branch of a foreign bank (see ¶30-322) or transactions involving money lent where the issuer is treated as an approved issuer by the Commissioner (see ¶30-310) and NRWT was not withheld from the interest. In addition, the payment of the approved issuer levy must be made by the due date. See ¶30-330. Interest will be charged if the payment is not made by the due date. See ¶14-200. Late payment penalties may also be incurred. See ¶30-330. Law: IT07 s RF 12; SCD ss 86I, 86IB, 86IC, 86J; TAA s 32M  ¶30-326 Zero rate of approved issuer levy on qualifying bonds The approved issuer levy applies at a 0% (as opposed to the usual 2% rate) on interest that is paid on debt securities that satisfy a set of strict requirements. The requirements are designed to limit the application of the 0% rate to bonds that are widely held and issued in New Zealand and to guard against the fiscal risk of closely held debt being packaged or reclassified so as to qualify for the 0% rate. The 0% rate will only be available where a registered security meets certain specific requirements and the approved issuer provides Inland Revenue with a statement confirming this. To access the 0% rate of approved issuer levy, the issuer of the security must register to pay the approved issuer levy in the first place. The issuer of the security must be an approved issuer under s 32M of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and must have registered  the security under s 86H of the Stamp and Cheque Duties Act 1971 (SCD). This allows payment of approved issuer levy at the 2% rate. The approved issuer levy is considered to be paid when either the existing 2% rate is paid, or the new 0% applies: s 86I of the SCD. When the approved issuer levy is considered to be paid, a 0% rate of NRWT will apply under s RF 12 of the Income Tax Act 2007 as long as the borrower and lender are not associated and providing the interest is not jointly derived with a New Zealand resident. Section 86IB of the SCD sets out additional requirements that a registered security must meet to qualify for the 0% rate of approved issuer levy on bonds issued in New Zealand: ▪ the security is denominated in New Zealand dollars ▪ the issue of the security was under a regulated offer for the purposes of the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013, an offer referred to in sch 1 cl 19 or, from 1 December 2014, cl 21(b) of that Act, or an offer to the public for the purposes of the Securities Act 1978 and was not a private placement ▪ the security is not an asset-backed security ▪ the activities of the registrar and paying agent for the security are conducted through one or more fixed establishments in New Zealand, and ▪ the security is quoted on a licensed market (within the meaning of s 6(1) of the Financial Markets Conduct Act) or the security is one of a number traded in a market that brings together buyers and sellers of securities and satisfies a widely held test. Widely held The widely held test is outlined in s 86IB(2) of the SCD. The test will be satisfied if an unlisted bond is held by at least 100 investors and the issuer has “reasonable grounds” for assuming that the investors are not:  ▪ associated with the issuer, except by being a beneficiary of a trust established for the main purpose of protecting and enforcing beneficiaries’ rights under the class of securities ▪ associated with another member of the group, and ▪ part of an arrangement aimed at temporarily increasing the number of bond holders (ie so that the bond meets the other requirements of the widely held test). In addition, no single investor or group of associated investors can hold more than 10% of the bonds issued. These requirements must be satisfied on each interest payment date for the 0% rate to apply. Documentation requirements Regardless of whether they pay the approved issuer levy at 2% or 0%, approved issuers will need to continue to file an approved issuer levy return/payment slip by the 20th day of the month following the month in which the interest payment was made. The slip requires the issuer to record the total amount of interest payments that have been zero-rated. A person will not generally be able to use the 0% rate of approved issuer levy in respect of any interest payments for which they fail to provide this information by the 20th day of the following month. However, there is scope for the Commissioner to provide a later deadline in a notice given to the approved issuer. Alternatively, an approved issuer that is late in supplying this information is still able to get a 2% rate if they pay the approved issuer levy at a later date, along with any interest and penalties. Law: IT07 s RF 12; SCD ss 86I, 86IB, 86J; TAA s 32M  ¶30-328 Approved issuer levy and double tax agreement relief Double tax agreements (DTAs) that have been revised in more recent years (eg DTAs with Australia and the United States) have  included a new exemption from source-country tax for interest derived by banks. For interest derived from New Zealand, the availability of the exemption depends on the borrower paying approved issuer levy unless the borrower is not eligible to elect to pay the levy, or there is no such levy, or the rate of the levy exceeds 2% of gross payments. The circumstances in which a person is eligible to pay the approved issuer levy have been clarified. A borrower is eligible to elect to pay the approved issuer levy to qualify for an exemption under a DTA, as well as for the purposes of the NRWT rules, even if paying the levy makes no difference to the way a transaction is dealt with under domestic law. Section 86L(2) aligns the approved issuer levy rules with treaty obligations when an amount of levy paid in error or excess is refunded. Section 32M of the Tax Administration Act 1994 clarifies that a borrower is eligible to elect to pay the approved issuer levy for the purposes of an exemption under a DTA as well as for the purposes of the NRWT rules. Law: IT07 s RF 12; SCD ss 86I, 86J, 86L(2); TAA s 32M  ¶30-330 Payment of approved issuer levy To ensure that approved issuers can pay interest to non-residents without deduction of non-resident withholding tax (NRWT), the approved issuer levy must be paid to Inland Revenue (IR). The approved issuer levy is calculated as 2% of the amount of interest paid by the approved issuer. The terms “interest” and “pay” take their meanings from the definitions of those terms in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Levy payments can be made electronically but should be accompanied by a completed approved issuer pay-in slip, form IR 67A. Usually IR will send a pre-printed IR 67A to the approved issuer about two weeks before an interest payment is due, but if necessary, blank forms can be obtained from IR or downloaded from their website at www.ird.govt.nz. Due dates for payment  Levy payments must be made by the 20th day of the month following the month in which the payment of interest was made. Failure to pay the levy by that date will result in late payment penalties and use of money interest being imposed. An initial late payment penalty of 1% will be added the day after the due date. A further 4% penalty will be charged if there is still an amount of unpaid tax (including penalties) seven days after the due date. Every month the amount owing remains unpaid after the due date, a further 1% incremental penalty will be charged. Persons who estimate that their approved issuer levy payments will be less than $500 in a tax year may pay the levy six-monthly. The due dates for payment are 20 October (for levies payable in the period from 1 April to 30 September, both dates inclusive) and 20 April (for levies payable in the period from 1 October to 31 March, both dates inclusive). If the $500 threshold is reached at any time during the tax year, the approved issuer must: ▪ pay to the Commissioner all approved issuer levy payments owed for the period from the beginning of the year until the end of the month in which the $500 threshold is reached (due date for payment is the 20th of the month following the month in which the threshold is reached), and ▪ pay the approved issuer levy monthly for the rest of the year. A person who is no longer required to pay the approved issuer levy must pay all outstanding levies to the Commissioner by the 20th of the month following the month in which the requirement to pay the levy has ceased. For example, if a person who pays the approved issuer levy six-monthly repays a registered loan from a non-resident on 30 June 2017 (ie the approved issuer levy is no longer payable), the levies payable for the period from 1 April 2017 to 30 June 2017 must be paid to the Commissioner by 20 July 2017. Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 2, February 1999 at 17 contains a brief commentary on the levy. See also IR’s booklet, Approved Issuer Levy Guide (IR 395), April 2019. Law: SCD ss 86K, 86KA; TAA s 139B  GAMING DUTY ¶30-345 Scheme of the Gaming Duties Act 1971 The Gaming Duties Act 1971 governs four types of duty: ▪ gaming machine duty ▪ casino duty ▪ totalisator duty, and ▪ lottery duty.  ¶30-350 Gaming machine duty A liability is imposed on all gaming machine operators for the payment of gaming duty on the proceeds of a gaming machine. A gaming machine is a device that is adapted or designed and constructed for use in gambling. The definition includes a device for gambling that is conducted partly by machine and partly by other means and also a device declared to be a gaming machine under regulations made under s 368 of the Gambling Act 2003. There are also specific exclusions from the definition, for example, a device used only to draw a lottery or a device used only to dispense tickets. A gaming machine operator is generally any corporate society licensed under the Gambling Act to conduct a dutiable game, and any person who conducts any dutiable game without such a licence. In Dick v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,276, the sole trustee of a trust was found not to be a “society” for gaming licence purposes, and therefore to be an unlicensed gaming machine operator. The Judge accepted that, because the trustee was not a society, the licence the trust held was invalid as the Minister had no statutory authority to issue licences to persons other than societies. Gaming machine duty returns  Every gaming machine operator is required to deliver to the Commissioner a monthly return in the prescribed form (IR 680) stating the amount of gaming machine duty and the problem gambling levy (see ¶30-367) payable. The return may also be filed electronically using myIR online secure services. The return and payment of duty must be made by the 20th day of the month following the month to which the return relates. The Commissioner can, when the gaming machine operator so requests, allow the operator to produce returns for a period ending on a day other than the last day of a calendar month. Gaming machine duty is levied at 20% of gross profit. See also IR booklet, IR 180, “Gaming machine duty”, July 2019, and IR’s website at www.ird.govt.nz. Assessment and disputes procedures Although every gaming machine operator is responsible for filing returns and making payment of the duty on a self-assessment basis, the Commissioner can issue assessments in the following situations: ▪ a person has defaulted in delivering a return ▪ the Commissioner is not satisfied with a return ▪ the Commissioner is not satisfied that the amount of duty paid by a person is correct, or ▪ the Commissioner believes that a person who has not filed a return is in fact liable to pay gaming machine duty. The Commissioner can make additions or alterations to an assessment at any time to ensure its accuracy. If an assessment is issued by the Commissioner, it will be deemed to be correct and the liability of the person will be determined accordingly, unless challenge procedures are implemented. If a person has filed a gaming machine duty return and has paid or been assessed for gaming machine duty in respect of that return period, the Commissioner cannot:  ▪ where an assessment has not been made, make an assessment, or ▪ where an assessment has been made, increase the amount of the assessment more than four years after the end of the month in which the return was filed or the assessment was made. The four-year time bar does not apply if the Commissioner believes the person knowingly or fraudulently failed to make a full and true disclosure of all material facts necessary to determine the amount of duty payable in respect of the return period. Recovery of gaming machine duty Gaming machine duty is recoverable as a debt due to the Crown and will be payable jointly and severally by, in the case of an incorporated gaming machine operator, all persons who, at any time during the period, were officers, trustees or other persons acting in management of the gaming machine operator, including the secretary and treasurer. In the case of an unincorporated gaming machine operator, the duty is payable by all persons who, at any time during the return period, were members, officers or trustees of the gaming machine operator. In the case of bankruptcy, liquidation or receivership, unpaid duty will have the same priority as GST. A person who has defaulted in the payment of gaming machine duty (the defaulter) may be subject to a notice by the Commissioner that a deduction for the unpaid duty will be made from any amount payable to the defaulter; for example, salary, wages or interest. The amount to be deducted may include a daily interest charge. The interest will be calculated from the date of the notice of deduction and end on the deduction date. Deductions from wages or salary cannot exceed: ▪ the lesser of 10% per week of the unpaid gaming machine duty due at the date of the notice or 20% of the wages or salary, or ▪ $10 per week  whichever is the greater. The amount deducted is deemed to be held in trust for the Crown. Unpaid deductions are recoverable from the person liable to make the deduction as if the gaming machine duty were payable by that person. Unpaid deductions may be recovered from joint bank accounts: s 12L(1C) of the Gaming Duties Act 1971. Inland Revenue and the Department of Internal Affairs have the ability to exchange information for the purposes of administering gaming machine duty legislation. Problem gambling levy For discussion of this levy, see ¶30-367. Law: GD ss 12B–12L, 14A  ¶30-355 Casino duty A 4% duty on any casino win is payable by casino operators licensed under the Gambling Act 2003. A casino win is a defined term similar to gaming machine profits and equates to the casino’s gross margin on games played. There is provision for a carry-forward of any losses against profits in ensuing months. Casinos must file a monthly return of their casino winnings and of the casino duty payable on those winnings. This return is due on the 20th of the month following the month to which the return relates. Inland Revenue and the Department of Internal Affairs have the ability to exchange information for the purposes of administering casino duty legislation. Casino duty is recoverable as a debt due to the Crown and is payable jointly and severally by, in the case of an incorporated casino operator, all persons who, at any time during the return period, were officers, trustees or other persons acting in management of the casino operator, including the secretary and treasurer. In the case of an unincorporated casino operator, the duty is payable by all persons who, at any time during the return period, were members, officers or trustees of the casino operator.  Law: GD ss 12M–12R, 14A  ¶30-360 Totalisator duty Totalisator duty (or the betting levy) is currently payable by TAB NZ (before 1 August 2020, the Racing Industry Transition Agency). In May 2019, it was announced that the duty would be repealed. Legislation enacted shortly after provides for the duty to be phased out over a three-year period. Before 1 July 2019, the rate of duty levied on betting profits was 4%. This was reduced to 2.67% on 1 July 2019 and to 1.33% on 1 July 2020. This rate is further reduced to 0% on 1 July 2021. The totalisator duty provisions will then be repealed completely from the Gaming Duties Act on 21 September 2021. The duty applies to race and associated sports betting profits. The calculation of betting profits is aligned with the calculation of casino gambling profits. For totalisator racing betting, sports betting and fixed-odds racing betting, betting profits are calculated as: amounts −  refunds  −  winning dividends  where: amounts is the total of all amounts received by TAB NZ or its agents for totalisator racing betting, sports betting and fixedodds racing betting refunds is the amount of refunds paid, and winning dividends is the amount of all winning dividends paid out in respect of amounts described above. Returns for totalisator duty must be filed, and totalisator duty paid, by the 20th of each month in relation to racing or sporting events for which the results have been declared during the previous month. If an event is held over two or more days, it is treated as having been held in the month in which the last day of the event occurs. Totalisator duty is recoverable as a debt due to the Crown.  Law: GD ss 4, 5  ¶30-365 Lottery duty Lottery duty of 5.5% is payable by the organiser of any lottery on a “New Zealand lottery” as defined in s 4(1) of the Gambling Act 2003. The definition includes a lottery, prize competition, or an instant game conducted by the Lotteries Commission. The lottery organiser must furnish a return to the Commissioner and pay the lottery duty owing within 14 days after the date of making the draw. The lottery duty payable is a debt due and payable to the Crown. Law: GD ss 3, 9–12A  ¶30-367 Problem gambling levy The Gambling Act 2003 is generally a social policy measure to control the growth of gambling and to prevent and minimise the harm caused by gambling, including problem gambling. The legislation also aims to ensure that money from gambling is used to benefit the community. To help recover the costs of problem gambling, a problem gambling levy is imposed on a gambling operator or a class of gambling operator in a specified sector of gambling. The levy is based on the estimated level of player expenditure. The problem gambling levy is neither a tax nor a duty. However, for the purposes of its collection and recovery, it is treated as if it were a duty. The powers of collection, recovery and enforcement in the Gaming Duties Act and the Tax Administration Act 1994 also apply to the levy. Any unpaid levy is recoverable as a debt due to the Crown. The amount of the problem gambling levy is calculated in accordance with a formula set out in s 320 of the Gambling Act. The formula takes into account the level of harm attributable to and the total revenue derived in each sector. Levy from 1 July 2019  The problem gambling levy rates for the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2022 (both dates inclusive) are as follows: Gambling sector  Levy rate (GST excl)  Casino operator  0.56%  Gaming machine operator  0.78%  Lotteries Commission  0.43%  TAB NZ (before 1 August 2020, Racing Industry Transition Agency)  0.52%  The problem gambling levy is treated as if it were a duty for the powers of collection, recovery and enforcement. Thus, the levy is payable monthly and payment, accompanied by the appropriate levy return, must be made by the same date as the relevant duty must be paid. In other words, for casino operators, gaming machine operators and the TAB NZ, the levy must be paid no later than the 20th day of the month following the month for which the return relates. For the Lotteries Commission, the levy must be paid no later than 14 days after the date of drawing of a lottery. Goods and services tax is also payable on the problem gambling levy. Inland Revenue issues a GST tax invoice showing the GST content of the problem gambling levy. See Gambling (Problem Gambling Levy) Regulations 2019. Law: GA ss 2, 3, 319–323  ¶30-370 Penalties for gaming duties The penalties regime in Pt 9 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) applies to all races run, lotteries drawn, casino wins arising and dutiable games played. A late payment penalty of 5% followed by a monthly incremental 1% charge applies to gaming duties not paid by the due date. The initial 5% late payment penalty is charged in two stages. The first 1% is charged the day immediately following  the due date and the remaining 4% is charged if the duty remains unpaid seven days after the due date. Use of money interest, under Pt 7 of the TAA is also charged on late payments and underpayments of duty. Civil penalties under ss 141A–141E of the TAA, ranging from 20% for not taking reasonable care to 150% for evasion, can also be imposed by the Commissioner. In the case of evasion, racing clubs, casino and gaming machine operators and lottery organisers may also be convicted and liable to pay a fine of up to $50,000. If convicted for evasion, the maximum term of imprisonment is five years. For further discussion of penalties see Chapter 14. Law: GD s 15  ¶30-375 Refunds of gaming duty if paid in error or excess If gaming duty has been paid in error or in excess of the amount required, it may be refunded to the person seeking the refund within eight years of the date of the original payment. The Commissioner must be satisfied that the duty was paid in error or in excess and that the person seeking the refund is entitled to receive it. The refund is generally paid by way of direct credit to the recipient’s bank account. Law: GD s 13  ACCIDENT COMPENSATION Overview of accident compensation  ¶31-010  Accident Compensation Levies  ¶31-015  Health and Safety Levy  ¶31-080  ¶31-010 Overview of accident compensation Accident compensation has a history in New Zealand dating back to the 1900s. Over the years there have been many changes to the system. Since 1 April 2002 accident compensation has been governed by the Injury Prevention, Rehabilitation, and Compensation Act 2001. This Act consolidated the law relating to accident compensation. In March 2010, the name of the Act was changed to the Accident Compensation Act 2001. Anyone who suffers injury by accident in New Zealand is covered by New Zealand’s accident compensation scheme, which provides accident insurance for all New Zealanders. In return, people do not have the right to sue for personal injury, other than for exemplary damages. The scheme operates on a no-fault basis, to meet medical costs and in some cases monetary compensation based largely on earnings. The scheme is administered by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) and is funded in part by compulsory levies payable by employers, employees, self-employed persons and motorists. Levies ACC levies are imposed and relate to funding claims for both workrelated and non-work-related injuries that are expected in the year ahead. Prior to the 2016–17 year, ACC levies also comprised a residual portion relating to funding claims for both work-related and non-work-  related injuries incurred before 1 July 1999. Prior to 1999, a “pay-asyou-go” funding approach was taken. This meant that the levies paid each year covered only the claim costs expected in that year — they did not cover the ongoing costs of claims made in previous years. The final amount needed to fund these pre-1999 claims was calculated and “locked in”, and the ACC had to collect the final amount by 31 March 2019. However, four years ahead of schedule, ACC reached the funds milestone required and the residual portion of the levy was removed with effect from 1 April 2016 for the Work and Earners’ Accounts and 1 July 2016 for the Motor Vehicle Account. For further discussion of the former residual levies, see CCH, 2016 New Zealand Master Tax Guide, Chapter 31: Accident Compensation. ACC manages funding through accounts (see the table in “Summary of levies” below). Employers, self-employed persons and private domestic workers must pay the levy at the rate appropriate to the occupational classification unit specified in the schedule to regulations made under the Accident Compensation Act. Work account levies The work account is used to fund work-related injuries. This account has an activity-based classification structure, which groups business activities according to injury risk and allocates costs to the business groupings in which the costs are incurred. Businesses with employees have to pay the ACC Workplace Cover levy and self-employed people pay the ACC CoverPlus or ACC CoverPlus Extra levy. Both businesses and self-employed people also pay the working safer levy, which is collected on behalf of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment to support the activities of WorkSafe New Zealand. Earners’ levies  In addition to the work account levies payable by employers, selfemployed persons and private domestic workers, the earners’ levy is payable by employees, self-employed persons and private domestic workers to fund the cost of non-work injuries suffered by people in paid employment and self-employment (except motor vehicle accidents, which are funded by a tariff on the price of petrol and a component of the motor vehicle licensing fee). Basis for levy payments Levies are payable for a levy year, which runs from 1 April to 31 March the following calendar year. Levies payable by employees are based on earnings and are collected through the PAYE system. Levies payable by employers and self-employed persons are invoiced annually by the ACC. Invoices are generally posted from July in each year, dependant on when ACC receives earning information from Inland Revenue. The work account levy paid by employers is based on earnings paid to employees in the current levy year. Levies payable by the self-employed are based on their previous years’ earnings. Note that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government announced that, in 2020, invoices normally sent in July would be delayed until October and that other invoices issued in 2020 would also be held for three months. Injury cover The standard injury cover for self-employed persons is called ACC CoverPlus. Under ACC CoverPlus, all full-time self-employed people who are incapacitated and have earnings are eligible for weekly compensation, generally based on their earnings in the previous year. Self-employed persons and non-PAYE shareholder-employees may apply to purchase ACC CoverPlus Extra that allows them to choose a guaranteed level of weekly compensation. The applicable levy is adjusted to reflect the nominated level of cover. The standard cover option for employers is ACC WorkPlace Cover. The ACC automatically calculates levies and invoices employers for this cover every year. Employers also have the option of joining the  ACC Accredited Employer Programme (previously the ACC Partnership Programme), which offers significant levy discounts to employers who take responsibility for their own workplace health and safety, injury management and rehabilitation of employees’ workplace injuries. See ¶31-025. Summary of levies The table below summarises the various ACC accounts and the injury types they fund: Account  Funded by  Covers  Entitlements  Work account  Employers (based on liable earnings of their employees), non-PAYE shareholderemployees, self-employed and private domestic workers (based on their liable earnings)  Work-related personal injuries affecting employees, the self-employed and private domestic workers  Medical and dental treatment Income replacement (lost earnings compensation) Elective surgery  Earners’ account  Employees (PAYE income), non-PAYE shareholderemployees, self-employed and private domestic workers (based on their earnings)  Non-work injuries (sustained at home, sport or recreation) suffered by people in the workforce  Lump sums and death-related entitlements for surviving spouses and children  Account  Funded by  Covers  Motor vehicle Motor vehicle owners and users (via an annual motor vehicle levy and a petrol levy)  Motor vehicle injuries sustained on public roads (except injuries covered by the Work account)  Non-earners’ Government account  Personal injuries sustained by people not in the paid workforce, eg students, beneficiaries, children, pensioners  Treatment injury  Personal injuries caused by medical treatment  Earners’ (through earners’ levies — see above) and nonearners’ accounts (Government)  Entitlements  ACCIDENT COMPENSATION LEVIES ¶31-015 Work account levy payable by employers and private domestic workers Employers and private domestic workers pay the work account levy for a levy year, based on the previous years’ earnings. The work  account levy regulations set the maximum amount of earnings for the work account levy payable by an employer or a private domestic worker. With respect to invoicing, the work account levy is based on an estimate of the salary or wages that will be paid by the employer in the year of cover or, in the case of a private domestic worker, the amount of earnings received in the levy year as a private domestic worker. The estimate is made by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) using liable earnings information provided by Inland Revenue for the previous levy year. For example, the ACC normally invoices employers from July 2020 for the work account levies it estimates are payable for the 2020–21 cover year, based on 2019–20 earnings. (However, note that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government announced that, in 2020, invoices normally sent in July would be delayed until October and that other invoices issued in 2020 would also be held for three months.) Once employers have filed their tax returns for the 2020–21 tax year, adjustments to the estimated levies paid for the 2020–21 cover year are made by the ACC. If levies have been overpaid by less than $20, credits are given to the employers for the 2021–22 cover year. Overpayments of more than $20 are refunded by the ACC. Further, if an overpayment is more than $1,000, the ACC must pay interest on the refund. For the 2017–18 and later levy years the interest rate is 6%. If levies have been underpaid by more than $20, invoices are issued for the difference. See s 173 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 (AC Act) and reg 23 of the Accident Compensation (Work Account Levies) Regulations 2019. Employers will receive an invoice pack that contains a year-end invoice (comprising the adjustment for the prior year, if any, and the Working Safer levy) and an estimated levy invoice (comprising the estimated current portion of the work account levy). Earnings as an employee Earnings as an employee, in relation to any person and any tax year, means all PAYE income payments of a person for the tax year: see s 9 of the AC Act.  “Earnings as an employee” in relation to any person and any tax year, does not include: ▪ any income-tested benefit, veteran’s pension, New Zealand superannuation, or schedular payment ▪ any parental leave payments paid under Pt 7A of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 ▪ any payment paid under the Compensation for Live Organ Donors Act 2016 ▪ any student allowance established in accordance with regulations made under s 645 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (prior to 1 August 2020, s 303 of the Education Act 1989) ▪ any amount allocated to a person or persons, other than the person who is the employee in question, under ss CD 11, CW 63, DB 58, GB 23 and GB 24 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (payment of excessive salary or wages, or allocation of excessive share of profits or losses, to relative employed by or in partnership with taxpayer) ▪ any benefit arising from an employee share scheme when the employer elects to withhold and pay tax in relation to the benefit ▪ any amount deemed to be a dividend paid by any person to the person who is the employee in question under s GB 25 (excessive remuneration by close company to shareholder, director, or relative) ▪ any redundancy payment ▪ any retiring allowance ▪ any pension from a superannuation scheme or pension fund that is not a retirement scheme (within s 6(1) of the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013) nor a superannuation scheme registered under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989, or  ▪ any pension that is paid in accordance with any of the following provisions: s DF 4 of the Income Tax Act 1994, DC 2 of the Income Tax Act 2004 or DC 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007; s DF 8A or DF 8B of the Income Tax Act 1994, DC 3 of the Income Tax Act 2004 or DC 3 of the Income Tax Act 2007; or FB 11 and ss FB 12 of the Income Tax Act 2007. See s 11 of the AC Act. Salary or wages paid to a spouse or partner are also excluded from the term “earnings as an employee”, except when approval for a deduction for the payment has been obtained from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. The ACC may accept that the required approval has been obtained if all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ services have been provided by the spouse or partner ▪ the person making the payment to the spouse or partner files or has filed a tax return ▪ a deduction is claimed in the tax return for the payment made to the spouse or partner ▪ the spouse or partner who received the payment includes the payment in a tax return filed with the Commissioner, and ▪ the spouse or partner who received the payment pays or has paid the tax on the amount received. See s 10 of the AC Act. For the purposes of the work account levy, “earnings as an employee” does not include any payment of first week compensation or weekly compensation. See s 12 of the AC Act. Work account levy calculation The maximum amount of employee earnings on which the 2019–20 work account levy was payable in respect of one employee was  $128,470. This figure increased to $130,911 for 2020–21. See the Accident Compensation (Work Account Levies) Regulations 2019. Example 1: Buns Unlimited is a bread manufacturer that has been in business since 1 February 1985. Its total payroll for the period 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 was $150,000 and it is expected to be the same for the 2020–21 tax year. No one employee is expected to earn more than $130,911 during that year. The following will be invoiced to Buns Unlimited in respect of the 2020–21 cover year: Work account levy  $  classification unit: bread manufacturing (21610) (0.70 × 150,000/100)  1,050.00  Working safer levy (0.08 × 150,000/100)  Subtotal Add GST @ 15% Total ACC levies payable to the ACC by the date specified on the invoice  120.00  1,170.00 175.50 1,345.50  Estimation As noted above, the work account levy is based on an estimate of the salary or wages that will be paid in the year of cover. This estimate is usually made by the ACC (because payment of the work account levy is required before a tax return for that year has been filed), but it may be made by the employer. New employers commencing business may make an estimate. Note that an estimate must be made if an employer reasonably believes that the amount of salary or wages that will be paid in the current year of cover will change by at least 20% from the previous year. See ss 173 and 174 of the AC Act. Classification of activity  The work account levy rate is determined by the type of activity or activities carried on. An “activity” is generally defined as a business, industry, profession, trade or undertaking, and includes administration, management, marketing and distribution, technical support, maintenance and product development. For a selfemployed person, an “activity” refers to the nature of the selfemployed person’s work rather than the context of business in which the self-employed person is working. See s 6 of the AC Act. The work account levy rates for the 2019–20 tax year, on an activity basis, were contained in sch 1 and sch 3 of the Accident Compensation (Work Account Levies) Regulations 2019 and the rates for the 2020–21 tax year are contained in sch 2 and sch 4 of those regulations. Note that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government announced on 6 July 2020 that work levies will remain the same until 31 March 2022. For the purposes of the work account levy, employees must be classified according to the employer’s activity. If an employer is engaged in two or more activities, all the employer’s employees must be classified in the activity attracting the highest levy rate. However, the employee may be classified in different classifications for different activities if all of the following are satisfied: ▪ the employer requests that different rates be applied ▪ the employer is engaged in two or more distinct and independent activities ▪ each of those activities provides services or products to external customers in such a way that each activity could, without adaptation, continue on its own without the other activities, and ▪ accounting records are kept to demonstrate the separate management and operation of each activity, and to allocate to each activity the earnings of the employees engaged solely in that activity.  See s 170 of the AC Act. If an employee is engaged in two or more activities, the employee must be classified in the activity attracting the highest levy rate. However, if a particular activity accounts for 5% or less of an employee’s earnings for the year, then that activity need not be considered when determining the correct rate, provided accurate records are kept regarding the apportionment of total earnings in the levy year. See s 171 of the AC Act. If none of the levy classifications defined in the regulations specifically apply to the activity of a particular employer, ACC may define the appropriate classification and decide the levy for that classification. See s 239 of the AC Act. Work account levy adjustments Upward adjustments of 50% must be made if an upward audit discloses that an employer’s safety management practices fail to meet the standard required by the upward audit tool. See s 175 of the AC Act and reg 17 of the Accident Compensation (Work Account Levies) Regulations 2019. If an upward adjustment has taken effect in a tax year, the Corporation must arrange a further upward audit of the employer to be conducted in every later tax year until an upward audit discloses that the employer’s safety management practices meet the standard required by the upward audit tool (reg 19). If in any tax year, after an employer has paid the Work Account levy for that tax year (including the applicable upward adjustment to that levy), a further upward audit under reg 19 discloses that the employer’s safety management practices meet the standard required by the upward audit tool, ACC must pay, on the employer’s request, any refund due exceeding $100 (after the downward adjustment). If the employer does not request a refund or the refund amount is $100 or less, a credit will be made to the work account levy due for the next tax year. See reg 21 of the Accident Compensation (Work Account Levies) Regulations 2019. Work account levy payment  The ACC invoices the work account levy from employers and selfemployed persons directly as part of its annual invoicing cycle. Employers and self-employed persons receive only one invoice from the ACC for all levies and only one payment is required per year. As noted above, this invoice will include the estimate of levies for the current year together with the adjustment for the prior year. The ACC begins to issue invoices from June. Payments are due by the date specified in the invoice. An employer or a private domestic worker is not liable to pay an amount of work account levy if the invoice amount for the levy is less than $20. Similarly, a self-employed person is not liable to pay an amount of work account levy if the invoice amount for the levy is less than $40. In addition, no penalties will be payable for the nonpayment of the work account levy invoiced within these thresholds. Arrangements may be made with ACC to pay the work account levy by instalments. However, interest is payable if levies remain unpaid on the day that is 30 days after the due date for payment, and penalties may apply if the full amount is not paid within a further six months. See ss 234 and 250 of the AC Act. Earnings from two or more employers If an employee has two employers and the total of the employee’s earnings exceeds the specified maximum for the tax year, each employer must pay the work account levy for that employee up to the specified maximum. Each employer must then apply, in writing, to the ACC for a refund of the work account levy overpaid. The refund is calculated on each employer’s proportion of earnings paid to the employee. Example 2: Doctor Clarke works at two hospitals for which she receives a total income of $190,000 pa, derived as follows: Hospital One:  $140,000  Hospital Two:  $50,000  Step 1  Step 2  Step 3  Calculate earnings on which levy was actually paid Hospital One:  $130,911 (maximum levy 2020–21 year)  Hospital Two:  $50,000  Total:  $180,911  The ratio of each employer’s amount to the total $180,911 (rounded) Hospital One:  $130,911/$180,911 = 72%  Hospital Two:  $50,000/$180,911 = 28%  Calculate earnings on which excess levy over specified maximum was paid Total earnings on which levy paid: $180,911 Less specified maximum: $130,911 Total earnings on which excess levy paid: $50,000  Step 4  Result  Calculate proportion of earnings on which excess levy paid to be attributed to each employer Hospital One:  $50,000 × 72% = $36,000  Hospital Two:  $50,000 × 28% = $14,000  Total:  $50,000  Hospital One:  Liable earnings reduced by $36,000  Hospital Two:  Liable earnings reduced by $14,000  Source: Adapted from Chartered Accountants Journal, November 2003. The refund application must be made within four years of the end of the tax year for which the employer levy is payable. For example, an application for a refund of work account levy overpaid for an employee with two employers for the 2016–17 tax year must be made by the end of the 2020–21 tax year.  Law: AC ss 6, 9–12, 168–174E, 234, 239, 244, 250  ¶31-025 Options to reduce levies Accredited employers with ACC Instead of the standard cover option that employers receive automatically (ACC WorkPlace Cover — see ¶31-010 and ¶31-015), an employer may choose to enter into an accreditation agreement with the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) under the ACC Accredited Employer Programme. The purpose of accreditation agreements is to promote injury prevention and rehabilitation, and reduce work-related personal injury claim costs and levies, by allowing accredited employers to manage workplace injuries and to provide statutory entitlements in relation to work-related personal injuries suffered by their employees. An accreditation agreement may provide that the employer is liable for some or all of the cost of providing statutory entitlements in relation to work-related personal injuries suffered by the employer’s employees and, in return, the ACC will charge the employer reduced levies. Levies can be adjusted by up to 90% in exchange for taking responsibility for employees’ work injury claims. An accreditation agreement suits employers who pay an annual Work Levy of over $250,000. The ACC may not enter into an accreditation agreement unless it considers that the specified requirements are satisfied, including the employer having appropriate health and safety policies and procedures to prevent work-related personal injuries, and having adequate reporting procedures. The ACC must establish a monitoring and audit programme in relation to accredited employers and accredited employers must report to the ACC in accordance with their accreditation agreements. If an accredited employer does not perform its obligations under an accreditation agreement, those obligations must be performed by the ACC. Previous workplace safety discounts  ACC previously offered two programmes for workplace safety discounts. The “ACC Workplace Safety Management Practices” option recognised medium to large businesses with more than 20 employees that had implemented effective health and safety systems and practices in their workplaces. Depending on the level of health and safety practices standard met, the employer could have received a discount on premiums at a rate of 10%, 15% or 20%. The “ACC Workplace Safety Discount” option applied for small to medium businesses (less than 10 employees) and self-employed people. If health and safety practices met the Workplace Safety Discount audit standards, a discount of 10% on premiums was available for three years, including the year the application for the discount was accepted. At the end of the three years, another application for the discount had to be made. Both these programmes were discontinued from 1 April 2017. For those employers already part of these programmes, they continue to receive their discounts until the expiry of their current contract. As part of the transition process to new workplace incentive programmes, all eligible businesses had the opportunity to extend their contract through to no later than 30 June 2019. Workplace incentive programmes ACC has developed and established workplace incentive programmes. The purpose of these programmes is to incentivise employers and self-employed persons to reduce the incidence, severity and impact of work-related injuries. A person’s work account levy will be able to be adjusted up or down in accordance with a workplace incentive programme. See ss 174A–174F of the Accident Compensation Act 2001. ACC undertook consultation and proposed changes that represent a shift in focus from a strongly compliance-driven approach to one that better reflects a business’ own health and safety performance and provides direct assistance to make health and safety improvements. Key changes implemented so far include the simplification of the existing experience rating system and the introduction of injury prevention grants and injury prevention subsidies.  No claims discount and experience rating programme The current experience rating system modifies a business’s ACC work levy based on the claims history of that business. This recognises that some owners have better safety claims history than others and aims to reward safe workplaces. Under the experience rating system, discounts on work levies may be available to employers with lower-than-average injury rates and better-than-average rehabilitation or return to work rates. Employers with worse-than-average claims experience may receive a loading on their work levy. There are two methods for applying experience rating: ▪ the experience rating programme ▪ the no-claims discount programme. The following table illustrates each method. Experience rating programme Annual work levy $10,000 or more per annum for each of the three years in the experience period Experience Three years period (based on a three-year period of claims history, eg 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2019)  No-claims discount programme Less than $10,000 per annum for all or any of the three years in the experience period  Experience rating programme  No-claims discount programme  Qualifying claims ▪ number of weekly compensation days paid ▪ number of claims with medical costs greater than $500 ▪ any fatal claim  ▪ number of weekly compensation days paid ▪ any fatal claim  Maximum possible loading/discount  The maximum modification will be up to + 75%/- 50% of the business’s standard industry levy rate  The maximum discount or loading will be +/- 10% of the business’s standard industry levy rate  Based on your individual performance comparative to your industry peers  Yes  No  Formula  Experience rating programme  No-claims discount programme  Modification comprises: ▪ industry size modification ▪ experience rating modification (weekly compensation days paid, and number of claims with medical costs greater than $500, and fatal claims)  ▪ “no claims discount” of 10% if no weekly compensation or fatal injury claims were made over the experience period ▪ no change to levy if your business has generated between one and 70 weekly compensation days paid and no fatal claim ▪ a 10% loading will be applied if your business has generated more than 70 weekly compensation days paid or any fatal claim  Experience rating applies to all employers, self-employed persons and non-PAYE shareholders who pay levies to cover work-related injuries (except those participating in the ACC Accredited Employers Programme). However, businesses and self-employed people who have less than the minimum liable earnings in any year of the experience period will not be subject to experience rating. The minimum liable earnings thresholds for the 2019–20 to 2021–22 years are set out in the Accident Compensation (Experience Rating) Regulations 2019. In addition, businesses and self-employed people who have not been invoiced for an ACC levy for each year of the experience period will not be subject to experience rating. There is provision for claims arising from an “adverse event” to be excluded from a business’s claims record for experience rating  purposes. Accordingly, provided the employer did not materially contribute to the injury, an employer’s experience rating will not be impacted by claims arising from injuries resulting from the adverse event. An adverse event must be declared by the Minister for ACC through publication of a notice in the New Zealand Gazette. One such example is the 22 February 2011 Christchurch earthquake, see Accident Compensation (Experience Rating — Canterbury Adverse Event) Notice 2011. Law: AC ss 174A–174F, 181–189  ¶31-048 ACC earners’ levy The earners’ levy is payable by: ▪ salary or wage earners ▪ self-employed persons, and ▪ private domestic workers. For the 2017–18 and later years, the earners’ levy has been set at a rate of $1.21 per $100 of earning, exclusive of GST. The levy rate will be reduced for a self-employed person who has purchased the right to receive weekly compensation (see ¶31-055 under heading “Predetermined and guaranteed weekly compensation”). A formula is provided for the calculation of the reduced levy. See reg 7 of the Accident Compensation (Earners’ Levy) Regulations 2019. Note that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government announced on 6 July 2020 that the earners’ levy will remain the same until 31 March 2022. Self-employed persons and private domestic workers may use the interactive calculators on the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) website (www.acc.co.nz) to work out what their levies will be. For salary or wage earners who are employees, or shareholderemployees who pay PAYE, the combined levies are collected by the  employer or PAYE intermediary, and paid to Inland Revenue (IR) as part of the PAYE payments. Similarly, private domestic workers pay the combined levies to IR. For the 2019–20 tax year, the maximum amount of earnings on which an earner had to pay the earners’ levy was $128,470, and for the 2020–21 and later tax years this figure increased to $130,911. For information relating to self-employed people working an average of more than 30 hours per week and earning less than the minimum income, see ¶31-055. Law: AC ss 219–222; IT07 s RA 9(1)(c)  ¶31-055 ACC levies payable by self-employed people Self-employed persons pay: ▪ the work account levy (see ¶31-015) ▪ the working safer levy (see ¶31-080), and ▪ the earners’ levy (see ¶31-048). See Example 1 below. Payment of the levies must be made in accordance with the invoice. Minimum and maximum income levels The work account levy and the earners’ levy are subject to minimum and maximum income levels. For the levy year beginning on 1 April 2019, the maximum income level for a self-employed person was $128,470. This increased to $130,911 for the 2020–21 tax year. For levy years beginning on or after 1 April 2019, the minimum amount of earnings on which the earners’ levy is payable by a selfemployed person who works, on average, for more than 30 hours per week (whether as an employee or not) is $36,816. See Examples 2 and 3 below.  A self-employed person is not required to pay the work account levy or the earners’ levy if the amount invoiced for that levy is less than $40. In addition, no penalties will be payable if an amount of the work account levy or the earners’ levy invoiced under this threshold remains unpaid. Work account levy Work account levies payable by self-employed people are based on the person’s previous year’s earnings from self-employment. The work account levy rates for the 2019–20 tax year for selfemployed persons, on an activity basis, were contained in sch 1 and sch 3 of the Accident Compensation (Work Account Levies) Regulations 2019 and the rates for the 2020–21 tax year are contained in sch 2 and sch 4 of those regulations. No loss offset from earlier tax years is allowed in determining a person’s earnings from self-employment (¶18-015). See s 169A of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 (AC Act). If a person earns income both from self-employment and as an employee, Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) levies will be payable on the self-employed income. See Example 3, mixed income, below. A newly self-employed person who is working an average of more than 30 hours per week and did not have earnings from selfemployment in the previous tax year, pays the work account levy and earners’ levy based on the minimum income levels. See Example 4, no previous self-employed earnings, below. Classification of activity The work account levy rate is determined by the type of activity or activities carried on. For the definition of “activity” see ¶31-015 and ss 6 and 168B of the AC Act. A self-employed person who is engaged in two or more activities must pay the work account levy at the highest applicable rate. However, if a particular activity accounts for 5% or less of the selfemployed person’s earnings for the income year, then that activity  need not be considered when determining the correct rate, provided accurate records are kept regarding the apportionment of total earnings in the income year. See s 171 of the AC Act. Reduction in levy A self-employed person’s work account levy may be reduced on the basis of that person’s safety management capabilities. The ACC will decide whether an adjustment will be made and the level of the adjustment. See s 175 of the AC Act. ACC has established workplace incentive programmes that allow adjustments to the work account levy. See ¶31-025. ▸ Note: The following examples are based on levy rates for the levy year commencing 1 April 2019. Example 1: General James is self-employed, running his own business as a café operator. He has been in business since January 1993. In the 2018–19 tax year James derived net income of $50,000. James has not purchased the right to receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of weekly compensation. The following levies for the 2019–20 cover year will be payable by James to the ACC on invoice: $ ACC CoverPlus levy Classification unit: cafes and restaurants (57300) Work account levy ($0.48 × $50,000/100)  240.00  Earners’ levy (current portion) ($1.21 × $50,000/100)  605.00  Working safer levy ($0.08 × $50,000/100)  40.00  Subtotal  885.00  Add GST @ 15%  132.75  Total ACC levies payable to the ACC on invoice  1,017.75  Example 2: Minimum income Chris works 32 hours a week as an independent tutor in accounting with the local university. Her income earned from tutoring during the 2018–19 tax year was $25,000. Chris has not purchased the right to receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of weekly compensation and she did not receive any earnings as an employee. As Chris has worked for more than an average of 30 hours per week earning income from self-employment, she is liable to pay levies to ACC calculated on the minimum income amount of $36,816. The following levies for the 2019–20 cover year will be invoiced to Chris by the ACC: $ ACC CoverPlus levy Classification unit: higher education (84310) Work account levy ($0.12 × $36,816/100)  44.18  Earners’ levy ($1.21 × $36,816/100)  445.47  Working safer levy ($0.08 × $25,000/100)  20.00  Subtotal  509.65  Add GST @ 15%  76.45  Total ACC levies invoiced  586.10  Example 3: Mixed income George is an employee in a local accounting firm working 25 hours a week as a clerk. George also has an independent contract with a local telemarketing company as a telemarketer for seven hours a week. In the 2018–19 tax year George received $21,000 in salary and wages as a clerk and $7,000 from his telemarketing. George is classified as “full-time” for the purposes of the earner levy because he works for a total of more than 30 hours per week. George has not purchased the right to receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of weekly compensation. The following levies for the 2019–20 cover year will be invoiced to George by the ACC: $ ACC CoverPlus levy Classification unit: telecommunication services (71230) Work account levy ($0.14 × $7,000/100)  9.80  Earners’ levy (($36,816 − $21,000)/100) × $1.21  191.37  Working safer levy ($0.08 × $28,000/100)  22.40  Subtotal  223.57  Add GST @ 15%  33.54  Total ACC levies invoiced  257.11  Of the amount invoiced, George will be liable to pay: $ Earners’ levy  191.37  Working safer levy 22.40 213.77 Add GST @ 15%  32.07 245.84  George is not required to pay the work account levy because the amount invoiced is less than $40. George will also pay ACC levies on his earnings as an employee via PAYE.  Example 4: No previous self-employed earnings Toni starts her own market research business on 1 April 2019. Before that date, Toni worked as an employee. During the 2019–20 tax year Toni works an average of 35 hours per week and informs Inland Revenue (IR) that she is self-employed. Toni has not purchased the right to receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of weekly compensation. In 2019, ACC will invoice Toni for ACC CoverPlus based on the minimum liable earnings specified by regulation for the 2019–20 cover year, being $36,816: $ ACC CoverPlus levy Classification unit: market research services (78530) Work account levy ($0.06 × $36,816/100)  22.09  Earners’ levy ($1.21 × $36,816/100)  445.47  Subtotal  467.56  Add GST @ 15%  70.13  Total ACC levies invoiced (for 12 months)  537.60  The levies for the 12-month cover period would be pro-rated if Toni had started her business after the beginning of the cover period. She receives an invoice once she has informed the ACC or IR of her employment status.  Self-employed persons may use the interactive calculators on the ACC website (www.acc.co.nz) to work out what their levies will be. However, where the self-employed person has mixed income, as in Example 3, care should be taken to ensure the correct result. Predetermined and guaranteed weekly compensation A self-employed person and a non-PAYE shareholder-employee (see ¶31-060) can apply to ACC for the right to receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of weekly compensation for loss of earnings as a self-employed person or shareholder-employee for any personal injury covered under ACC. This type of policy is known as the CoverPlus Extra policy. If no such agreement has been entered into, compensation will be determined in accordance with sch 1 of the AC Act. The guaranteed level of weekly compensation must be more than a specified minimum and less than a specified maximum. The specified minimum amount is 80% of the minimum weekly earnings, adjusted annually in accordance with sch 1 cl 42 of the AC Act. From 1 July 2020, the specified maximum guaranteed level of weekly compensation is $2,066.58 per week and the specified minimum is $604.80. They are subject to adjustment for the movement in average weekly earnings. See s 115 and sch 1 cls 42(3) and 46 of the AC Act. If a self-employed person or shareholder-employee enters into an agreement with the ACC for the right to receive guaranteed weekly compensation, the levy payable by the self-employed person or shareholder-employee is determined in accordance with regulations. The self-employed person or shareholder-employee must continue to pay the earners’ levy. See ss 211 and 212 of the AC Act. Law: AC ss 6, 168B, 169A, 171, 175, 208–212, 222, 244, sch 1  ¶31-060 Shareholder-employees and ACC Employers are required to pay the earner’s levy and work account levy in respect of PAYE earnings paid to shareholder-employees.  Classification for levy purposes is based on the main activity of the company and not that of the individual shareholder-employee. Shareholder-employees who are not subject to PAYE deductions may apply to the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) to take out their own ACC CoverPlus Extra policy and receive a predetermined and guaranteed level of weekly compensation. See ¶31-055 under the heading “Predetermined and guaranteed weekly compensation”. Shareholder-employees who purchase ACC CoverPlus Extra are treated as self-employed for the calculation of weekly compensation entitlements and they pay levies at selfemployed rates. Where a non-PAYE shareholder-employee purchases ACC CoverPlus Extra, his or her employer is not required to pay the earner’s levy or work account levy in respect of earnings paid to the shareholder-employee. Shareholder-employees who purchase ACC CoverPlus Extra are invoiced by ACC for the ACC CoverPlus levy (the work account levy and earners’ levy), and the working safer levy. For more information, see the ACC CoverPlus Extra application form, ACC 855, March 2018, ACC CoverPlus Extra Terms and Conditions, ACC 5345, February 2018 and the Product Comparison — ACC CoverPlus and CoverPlus Extra, ACC 4575, March 2018. See also the information booklet entitled Getting to know ACC — An Overview of ACC for businesses, ACC 4871, April 2017. Law: AC ss 190, 191  ¶31-070 Timing of deductions for ACC levies Levies collected by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) under the Accident Compensation Act 2001 are generally deductible in the year in which they become due and payable by the person. The levies are: ▪ work account levies ▪ earners’ levies  ▪ levies to meet the costs of the Regulator ▪ contributions to the insolvent insurers’ fund, and ▪ levies or penalties paid to the non-compliers’ fund. If a deduction for the levy has been allocated to an income year earlier than the income year in which the levy becomes due and payable, the deduction remains allocated to the earlier income year if the Commissioner of Inland Revenue cannot lawfully amend the assessment for the income year. Early balance date taxpayers If a person has a balance date between 1 October and 6 April (inclusive), special provision is made to ensure that the timing of deductibility of the above levies is not affected by the extension of the terminal tax due date for persons with a tax agent. Law: IT07 s EF 3  ¶31-075 Taxation of ACC compensation payments All payments of weekly compensation made under the Accident Compensation Act 2001 by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) are income. Similar types of compensation paid under the Accident Compensation Act 1982, the Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance Act 1992, the Accident Insurance Act 1998 and the Injury Prevention, Rehabilitation, and Compensation Act 2001 are also income. See ¶5-302. Example: In Case Z9 (2009) 24 NZTC 14,100 the Taxation Review Authority held that when taxexempt benefits were replaced with ACC weekly compensation, the benefits became assessable income because they had the character of compensation.  Generally, employees receiving earnings-related compensation and allowances from the ACC will be subject to PAYE on those payments. See the definition of “salary or wages” in s RD 5. Law: IT07 ss CF 1(1)(a), (2), RD 5  HEALTH AND SAFETY LEVY ¶31-080 Working safer levy (health and safety levy) Employers must pay a separate levy, known as the working safer levy, of 8¢ per $100 of earnings paid to employees to meet the costs of administration of the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015. The levy is also payable at the rate of 8¢ per $100 of earnings derived by the self-employed. This levy is included in the scheduled rates put out by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) in its publications but is not included in the basic rates set out in the regulations. The funding levy is paid, collected and remitted together with the work account levy paid under the Accident Compensation Act 2001. The Health and Safety at Work (Rates of Funding Levy) Regulations 2016 prescribe the rate of the funding levy. The Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 is part of “Working Safer: a blueprint for health and safety at work” and reforms New Zealand’s health and safety system following the recommendations of the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health and Safety. Working Safer is aimed at reducing New Zealand’s workplace injury and death toll by 25% by 2020. The Act’s key emphasis is on everyone in the workplace being responsible for health and safety. The Act works to focus effort on what matters, based on business risk, control and size by: ▪ reinforcing proportionality — what a business needs to do depends on its level of risk and what it can control  ▪ shifting from hazard spotting to managing critical risks — actions that reduce workplace harm rather than trivial hazards ▪ introducing the “reasonably practicable” concept — focusing attention on what is reasonable for a business to do ▪ changing the focus from the physical workplace to the conduct of work — what the business actually does and so what it can control ▪ supporting more effective worker engagement and participation — promoting flexibility to suit business size and need. Law: HSW s 201  GOODS AND SERVICES TAX Background to goods and services tax  ¶32-010  Proposed changes to goods and services tax  ¶32-012  General  ¶32-015  Apportionment of input tax  ¶32-022  Zero-Rated Supplies for GST  ¶32-030  GST Exempt Supplies  ¶32-040  Special Cases  ¶32-053  Accounting for GST  ¶32-073  Taxable Periods  ¶32-090  Taxpayer’s Obligations  ¶32-148  Business-to-Business Supplies of Financial Services ¶32-300 Imported Services  ¶32-400  Goods and Services Tax on Land Transactions  ¶32-500  ¶32-010 Background to goods and services tax Goods and services tax (GST) is a broadly based consumption tax that is imposed under the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) on the supply of goods and services in New Zealand, and on imported goods, on or after 1 October 1986. Although the tax is generally levied at the standard rate, currently 15% (12.5% before 1 October 2010; 10% before 1 July 1989), some supplies are taxed at a zero rate and a small number of specified supplies are exempt from the tax. The definitions of “goods” and “services” are mutually exclusive but together are virtually all-encompassing. The only item to which the  GST Act does not apply is “money”, which is also defined. All other commodities are covered by the GST Act. GST is not a tax on business profits or turnover. It is a tax on consumption in New Zealand and is ultimately paid by the consumer or end-user. The tax is paid at each step along the chain of ownership or supply, until the goods or services reach the end-user. GST paid in this way is “collected” by “registered persons” and returned at regular intervals to Inland Revenue (IR) or, in the case of imported goods, to the New Zealand Customs Service. These registered persons — in effect, suppliers who meet the criteria for registration under the GST Act — account to IR for the GST they have collected and claim a credit for the GST they have paid. By this credit offset system, only a net figure is “returned” by registered persons. The net figure is calculated by deducting the “input tax” (the GST component in supplies made to the registered person) from the “output tax” (the GST component in supplies made by the registered person). Where that net figure is a positive amount (because supplies made exceed supplies received), the taxpayer must pay GST to IR. Where that net figure is a negative amount (because supplies received exceed supplies made), the taxpayer will be entitled to a refund from IR of the excess GST paid.  ¶32-012 Proposed changes to goods and services tax In February 2020, Inland Revenue released an officials’ issues paper, “GST policy issues”. A number of issues have been identified where the legislation produces an outcome that does not reflect the underlying policy intent. The purpose of the issues paper is to outline technical tax policy issues and provide potential policy options and proposed solutions to these issues. Proposals include: ▪ improving and simplifying tax invoice requirements ▪ excluding cryptocurrency from certain GST and financial arrangement rules (while remaining taxable under existing income tax rules)  ▪ changes to the GST apportionment and adjustment rules ▪ zero-rating certain domestic transport services and certain conference and staff training services supplied to non-resident businesses ▪ removing compliance difficulties from a GST-registered third party unknowingly receiving an insurance pay-out ▪ clarifying and improving the compulsory zero-rating of land rules ▪ simplifying how GST can apply to certain financial services in the managed funds industry, and ▪ a number of other technical and remedial changes. Submissions closed on 9 April 2020 and it is expected that the finalised proposals will be included in the next suitable omnibus tax bill.  GENERAL ¶32-015 Rate of GST Goods and services tax is generally charged at the standard rate of 15% on the supply of goods and services in New Zealand. Some supplies are taxed at a zero rate (see ¶32-030) and a small number of specified supplies are exempt from the tax (see ¶32-040). The standard rate of 15% is calculated on the “value of that supply”. For example, $15 GST is charged if the value of the supply is $100. (The concept of “value of that supply” is discussed further at ¶32-027.) The Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 provides the following formula in the definition of “tax fraction” (see s 2(1)) to facilitate calculation of the GST component in a tax-inclusive price: a 100 + a  where “a” is the rate of tax. The current tax rate results in the following tax fraction: 15 100 + 15  which equates to  3 23  Example 1: Goods are sold with a GST inclusive price of $2,000. The GST included in the price is $260.87. The calculation to find the GST component is: $2,000  ×  3 23  =  $260.87  The GST exclusive price can be isolated by dividing the GST-inclusive price by 23 and multiplying by 20 (or multiplying by 0.8695652). Example 2: Price (including GST)  GST exclusive price  $115 ÷  23 × 20  =  $100  $770 ÷  23 × 20  =  $669.57  The tax fraction method has particular application when the GST component in a number of supplies is to be isolated. Law: GST ss 2(1), 8(1)  ¶32-020 Charging GST output tax Section 8 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) states that GST is charged on supplies: ▪ in New Zealand  ▪ on goods and services ▪ on or after 1 October 1986 ▪ by a registered person ▪ in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity, and ▪ by reference to the value of that supply. GST is not charged on exempt supplies. Supply The GST Act does not give an exhaustive definition of “supply” but gives the general definition: “ ‘supply’ includes all forms of supply”. See s 5(1). This suggests that it is intended to cover almost all types of transactions. The making available to another party of an identifiable commodity appears to be the essential element of supply. Therefore, sales, gifts, leases, loans and transmissions under wills are all “supplies”. In addition, specific activities are deemed to be supplies where they might not otherwise be considered to be so. See ¶32-023. Supplies made in New Zealand Under s 8(2)–(4) of the GST Act a supply is deemed to be made in New Zealand if the supplier is resident in New Zealand or is nonresident but the goods are in New Zealand at the time of supply or the services are physically performed in New Zealand. An exception exists for non-residents who make supplies to registered persons. In that case, the supply will be treated as being outside New Zealand unless the supplier and the recipient agree that the supply will be treated as if it was made in New Zealand. A special rule exists that may deem imported services to be made in New Zealand and therefore subject to the reverse charge regime. In this case the resident recipient will be liable to account for GST on the service. With effect from 1 October 2016, services are also treated as being supplied in New Zealand when a non-resident supplier supplies remote services to a New Zealand resident, unless the services are  physically performed in New Zealand by a person who is in New Zealand at the time the services are performed. However, supplies of remote services by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand GSTregistered recipients for their taxable activity are treated as being supplied outside New Zealand, unless the supplier chooses otherwise. Where the supplier chooses to treat the supply as made in New Zealand, the supply is zero-rated. See ¶32-067. With effect from 1 December 2019, supplies of low-value imported goods by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand residents are also treated as being supplied in New Zealand. However, supplies to New Zealand GST-registered recipients for their taxable activity are treated as being supplied outside New Zealand, unless the non-resident supplier chooses otherwise. See ¶32-064. In the course or furtherance of a taxable activity Taxpayers are liable to GST on all supplies made “in the course or furtherance” of any taxable activity they conduct. This requirement usually ensures that GST will not be charged on personal supplies, eg a supply is made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity when a retailer sells business stock. A supply is not made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity if a residential home that has always been exclusively for private purposes is sold by the retailer. Secondly, the requirement is sufficiently broad to cover any supplies made “in connection” with a taxable activity. It readily includes, for example, the sale of capital assets used in the carrying on of a taxable activity. There is also no basis in s 8 to apportion output tax for sale assets that had a mixed use. As noted in Case K55 (1988) 10 NZTC 453: Section 8 does not provide for any apportionment of the supply being in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity and being for any other purpose or object, by such words as “to the extent of” or “so far as”; such phrases, or phrases of that nature being commonly found when apportionment is intended in the legislation.  In Hibell v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,195, a fisherman who sold unwanted transferable fishing quota was liable for GST. Fraser J rejected the fisherman’s argument that GST should be imposed only on the sale of his catch as the transfer of the quota was an extraordinary transaction that was neither in the course nor in furtherance of his taxable activity. In Case N43 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,361 the Taxation Review Authority confirmed that s 8(1) imposes GST on supplies relating to both the taxpayer’s principal and any secondary activities. Once a taxpayer is registered for GST, any supply made in connection with any taxable activity may be caught even though the taxpayer may not be liable to be registered for those secondary activities under s 51. Output tax will only be imposed where goods and services are actually supplied. This requirement was demonstrated in C of IR v New Zealand Refining Co Ltd (1997) 18 NZTC 13,187 (CA) and Chatham Islands Enterprise Trust v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,075 (CA). In New Zealand Refining Co Blanchard J explained (at 13,193): It is fundamental to the GST Act that the tax is levied on or in respect of supplies. It is not a tax on receipts or on turnover; it is a tax on transactions. It is therefore necessary to distinguish between supplies and the taxable activity in the course of which they are made. The definition in s 6 itself requires a nexus between a supply and consideration. Law: GST ss 5, 8  ¶32-021 Claiming GST input tax Input tax is, broadly, GST paid by a registered person. It covers tax charged on the acquisition of goods and services and Customs GST levied on imported goods. It also includes the tax fraction (ie 3 divided by 23) of the consideration in money for certain purchases of secondhand goods by a registered person where there is no GST impost on the transaction (the secondhand goods credit). The term “input tax” is defined in s 3A of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985.  There are detailed rules regarding the amount of input tax, the entitlement to deduct it and the secondhand goods credit. These and other aspects of input tax are explained below. Apportionment and adjustments are covered later in this chapter. The amount of input tax Generally, the amount of input tax is the GST charge when a person acquires goods or services, or the amount of Customs GST levied on imported goods, or the tax fraction of the consideration paid when purchasing secondhand goods. However, special rules apply to the amount of input tax credit claimable in respect of certain associated party transactions. They place a maximum limit on the amount of input tax, being the output tax actually accounted for in respect of the relevant transactions. See ¶32-022. Additional valuation rules also apply to the secondhand goods input tax credit. See further at ¶32-056. Entitlement to deduct Section 20(3C) specifies that input tax may be deducted only to the extent to which the goods or services are used for, or are available for use in, making taxable supplies. Three important consequences follow from this wording: ▪ Firstly, a person can only claim input tax “to the extent that” he or she applies the goods for taxable use. This wording plainly establishes apportionment. ▪ Secondly, the test is one of “use” (or availability for use). ▪ Thirdly, the goods or services must be for “making taxable supplies”. Section 20(3C) also prevents a registered person from claiming input tax deductions for goods entered for home consumption (imported goods) when they deliver or arrange the delivery of the goods to a person in New Zealand.  Who can claim? The person who claims input tax is the person who “acquires” the relevant goods and services. This rule applies for the acquisition of taxable supplies and for the secondhand goods input tax credit. See ¶32-056. See also Case N39 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,333, Case P84 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,561 and Case T10 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,055. For Customs GST, the relevant person is the one who “enters the goods for home consumption” (ie the importing party). See ¶32-064. For all forms of input tax, the goods or services must be used for (or be available for use in) making taxable supplies by the person claiming input tax. Deducting input tax Generally, a tax invoice issued by the supplier is required before the recipient can action an input tax claim. A deduction of input tax may be made only if: ▪ a valid tax invoice or credit or debit note has been provided for the supply and retained by the recipient at the time the return is furnished ▪ a tax invoice is not required because the cost of the supply does not exceed $50 (see ¶32-180) ▪ the Commissioner decides that a tax invoice, or credit or debit note, need not be issued ▪ sufficient records are maintained when a registered person receives a non-taxable supply of secondhand goods (see ¶32056) ▪ the supply is a supply of goods or services that is treated by s 5B (supply of certain imported goods and services) as being made by the recipient and the recipient has accounted for output tax, or ▪ the supply is the supply of goods and services that is treated by s 60B as the supply to a nominated person and that person maintains sufficient records as required by s 24(7B).  Where a tax invoice is not required to support an input tax claim, other documentation (such as invoices or receipts, and proof of payment), the name and address of the supplier, the date of purchase, and a description of the goods or services should be retained. Time limit The ability to make an input tax deduction for a particular taxable period in a later period is subject to the specific mechanism in the proviso to s 20(3). Under para (a) of the proviso, a registered person is subject to a twoyear time limit in which a GST input tax deduction omitted from an earlier taxable period can be claimed in a later taxable period. That later taxable period must begin on or before the date that is two years from: ▪ the date on which the payment for the taxable supply is made, or ▪ the date on which a tax invoice is issued for the taxable supply, whichever is the earlier. In addition, under para (b) of the proviso, there is no time limit where the failure to make the deduction in the earlier taxable period arises from: ▪ an inability to obtain a tax invoice ▪ a dispute over the payment amount for the supply ▪ a mistaken understanding that the supply was not a taxable supply, or ▪ a clear mistake or simple oversight. An exception exists for newly registered persons who may claim input tax on purchases made at any time before their registration if those goods or services will be used in making taxable supplies. The amount of that input claim must reflect any previous use of those goods or services before the taxpayer’s GST registration, see s 21B. See ¶32-088.  Law: GST ss 3A, 20(2), (3), (3C)–(3K), 21B  ¶32-022 Apportionment of input tax The test for input tax (under s 3A) is determined under an apportionment approach. Taxpayers are permitted an input tax credit to the extent they “actually use” the goods or services in making taxable supplies. Under s 20(3C) a GST-registered recipient can apportion the GST incurred on the acquisition of goods or services and claim an input tax deduction for goods or services that are available for use in making taxable supplies. Under s 20(3D), recipients are relieved from the obligation to apportion the input tax on acquisition of goods or services if they make both taxable and exempt supplies and have reasonable grounds to believe that the total value of their exempt supplies will be no more than the lesser of $90,000 or 5% of the total consideration for all their taxable and exempt supplies for the adjustment period. In determining the extent to which goods or services are used for making taxable supplies, s 20(3G) stipulates that, at the time of acquisition, a person must estimate how they intend to use the goods or services, and choose a determination method that provides a fair and reasonable result. Inland Revenue has stated that the estimate could be made on the basis of any records that are available, previous experience, business plans or other suitable methods. The method of working out the extent of the intended taxable use will largely depend on the nature of the goods and services in question. The determination is expressed as a percentage of total use. The percentage of total use will then be used by the person to claim the proportion of the input tax that corresponds with the estimated intended taxable use (s 20(3H) and (3I)). The resulting calculation is: full input tax deduction (ie the total tax charged or Customs GST charged or imputed secondhand goods credit)  percentage intended use (ie the percentage of intended × use for making taxable supplies estimated at the time of acquisition)  Inland Revenue provided a discussion of how the apportionment rules apply in practice in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 33. The simple examples below demonstrate how the calculation applies. Examples: ▪ A GST-registered sole trader purchases a car to replace her existing car. Her logbook for her old car indicates that she used it 80% for business purposes and 20% for private purposes. She does not expect this ratio to change so she estimates she will use the new car 80% for business purposes. She pays $20,000 plus $3,000 GST and the business she operates is 100% taxable. On acquisition, she can include a claim of $2,400 in her GST return ($3,000 × 80%). ▪ Assuming the same facts as in the above example, but the intended use of the car is 30% business and 70% private. The resulting deduction is therefore $3,000 × 30% = $900. ▪ A property developer company makes almost wholly taxable supplies. It purchases a residential property from an unregistered person and rents out that property long term pending a deferred (12-month) sale of that property. The annual rent is $20,000 and the company makes no other exempt supplies (eg does not receive any interest income) and has a GST taxable turnover of $1,000,000 pa. Since the total value of exempt supplies is expected to be no more than the lesser of $90,000 and 5% of the total consideration for all supplies, the company does not have to apportion the input tax and can claim a full input tax credit on the land.  The rules attempt to achieve as much accuracy as possible at acquisition by requiring taxpayers to make fair and reasonable estimates on the intended taxable and non-taxable uses of goods and services acquired. However, taxpayers might have to make further adjustments in later periods if the actual taxable use subsequently varies from the intended taxable use. See ¶32-088. Special rules: Associated parties, land, financial services providers, non-profit bodies, registered non-residents and mixed-use assets under the Income Tax Act 2007 Associated parties Special rules apply to the amount of input tax credit claimable for certain associated party transactions. The rules state that the amount of input tax for the supply is limited to the amount accounted for as  output tax for all supplies that are part of the relevant transactions. This applies: ▪ where a supply consists wholly or partly of land and is part of an arrangement involving more than two associated parties and more than one supply. The amount of input tax cannot exceed the amount of output tax actually accounted for on all supplies that are part of the arrangement (s 3A(3B)) ▪ where a person registers for GST and claims a change of use input tax credit for assets and other commodities already owned at the time of registration and those assets or other commodities were acquired from an associated person. The resulting change of use credit cannot exceed the output tax actually accounted for by the supplier (s 3A(3C)). Land Section 20(3J) requires an apportionment of input tax when a supply that includes land is zero-rated under the zero-rating rules in s 11(1) (mb) (see ¶32-505). Technically, the input tax under a zero-rated transaction is zero. However, a complicated rule applies where the supply is wholly or partly of land and that supply is zero-rated. Here, the recipient is required to: ▪ identify the nominal amount of GST that would be charged on the supply if it was not zero-rated ▪ estimate the intended taxable use of the goods or services using a method that produces a fair and reasonable result ▪ account for output tax for the proportion of the nominal GST component for any non-taxable use of the land, and ▪ for later adjustment periods, make adjustments in relation to any subsequent change of use of the land. The broad effect of this is to render a GST-registered person liable to account for output tax on goods or services to the extent that he or  she acquires zero-rated land and uses part of that supply for nontaxable (exempt or private) purposes. Financial services providers To help reduce the financial services sector’s high compliance costs, s 20(3E) allows financial services providers to agree with the Commissioner on a fair and reasonable method of apportionment under the apportionment provisions. See ¶32-044. The method must have regard to the tenor of the present apportionment rules. This treatment is extended to non-residents registered under s 54B that principally make supplies of financial services — s 20(3M). See ¶32148 for a discussion of registration under s 54B. Non-profit bodies Section 20(3K) provides that where a New Zealand resident non-profit body uses goods or services other than for making exempt supplies, the goods or services are treated as being used for making taxable supplies. Registered non-residents A non-resident business that does not carry on, or intend to carry on, a taxable activity in New Zealand and is registered under s 54B or, with effect from 1 December 2019, is a supplier of distantly taxable goods (see ¶32-064) or remote services (see ¶32-067), is able to claim input tax deductions under s 20(3L) for GST incurred on business expenses. This subsection allows input tax to be deducted to the extent to which the goods or services are used for, or are available for use in, making taxable supplies, treating all the supplies made by the person as if they were made and received in New Zealand. Effectively, the provision requires the registered non-resident to determine what their input tax deductions would be if they were a resident business. Note that s 20(3LB) and (3LC) prevent GSTregistered non-residents and, with effect from 1 December 2019, suppliers of distantly taxable goods or remote services, from claiming input tax deductions for GST levied by the New Zealand Customs Service. Instead, where the non-resident acts as an “importer”, the recipient of the goods is treated as if they had paid the GST and is entitled to an input tax credit for the GST if they are GST-registered  and receiving the goods as part of their taxable activity. This does not apply if the non-resident is the recipient. To be registered under s 54B, the Commissioner must be satisfied as to a range of matters, including that the non-resident is registered for a consumption tax in the territory in which they are resident. As GST is intended to be neutral for businesses, the intention is to extend this neutrality to non-resident businesses by ensuring that New Zealand GST incurred is not generally an economic burden for them. See ¶32148 for a discussion of registration under s 54B. Mixed-use assets under the Income Tax Act 2007 Section 20(3JB) requires an apportionment of input tax on a supply to which s 20G applies. Section 20G applies to assets described in s DG 3 of the Income Tax Act 2007. These assets are referred to as mixeduse assets and include land, or improvements to land, and certain boats and aircraft that are used partly for business purposes and partly for private purposes, but that are also partly unused during a year. Section 20(3JB)(a) applies on acquisition of the asset, and requires the recipient to: ▪ identify the nominal amount of GST that would be charged on the supply ▪ estimate the intended taxable use of the goods using a method that produces a fair and reasonable result, and ▪ account for input tax for the amount of the taxable use. For later adjustment periods, ss 20(3JB)(b) and 20G require the recipient to make adjustments in relation to any subsequent change of use. See ¶32-089. Law: GST ss 3A, 20(2), (3), (3C)–(3M), 21B  ¶32-023 Deemed supplies for GST In addition to the actual supply of goods and services, certain specific activities are deemed to constitute supplies where they might not otherwise be considered to do so. This confirms the legislative intent  to subject virtually all types of transactions to GST. The following are deemed to be supplies: ▪ entertainment expenses ▪ games of chance, instant games, lotteries and prize competitions — s 5(10), (11) ▪ games in casino premises — s 5(11B), (11C) ▪ supplies by public and local authorities — s 5(6), (7) ▪ race and sports betting — s 5(8) ▪ certain uninvited direct sales (such as door-to-door or telephone sales) and layby sales once a change in ownership in the goods sold is confirmed — s 5(4), (5) ▪ a contribution made to a local authority as a condition of consent under the Resource Management Act 1991 or the Local Government Act 2002 — s 5(7B), (7C) (see ¶32-068). A deemed supply can also occur if two or more companies amalgamate and the amalgamated company is not registered for GST immediately after amalgamation. The activities and transactions discussed below are deemed to amount to “supplies made in the course of a taxable activity”. Sale in satisfaction of debt — s 5(2) Goods sold towards the satisfaction of debts and goods repossessed under a hire purchase agreement are deemed to be supplied in the course of a taxable activity carried on by the debtor. The debtor is deemed to be a registered person. Goods will not be deemed to be supplied in the course of a taxable activity if: ▪ the debtor has notified the person selling the goods (the creditor) that the supply would not be a taxable supply if made by the debtor, or  ▪ if the creditor has not been notified, the creditor has determined that this is the case on the basis of any reasonable information held. When a debtor provides an incorrect statement to the creditor in these circumstances, the debtor is liable to return GST on the supply themselves. Where the debtor has not provided the creditor with any statement as to the GST treatment of the supply, the creditor will be treated as registered and be required to return the GST on the sale: s 51B(1)(b). The legislation was amended to be consistent with the Court of Appeal’s judgment in this regard in C of IR v Edgewater Motel Ltd (2002) 20 NZTC 17,984 (CA). Cessation of registration — s 5(3) A supply is deemed to be made in the course of a taxable activity if a person ceases to be a registered person. Goods and services forming part of the assets of the taxable activity carried on by the person are deemed to be so supplied immediately before the person ceases to be registered and output tax will be payable in respect of that supply. See Case N64 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,488. Cessation of registration of non-resident — s 5(3B) When a non-resident ceases to be a registered person any goods that are part of the person’s taxable activity that are present in New Zealand at that time are treated as supplied by the person in the course of the taxable activity immediately before cessation of registration. Similarly, any services that would be performed in New Zealand as part of the person’s taxable activity at that time are also treated as performed by the person in the course of the taxable activity immediately before cessation of registration. Deemed supply of asset by transfer of ownership — s 5(3C) Section 5(3C) ensures that financial services are treated in the same way upon deregistration as if the person actually disposed of them and not inadvertently taxed. The provision provides that if the transfer of an asset on cessation of registration would be a financial service (for example, when a supply has been made but the purchaser has not yet made payment, the resulting debt security may be an asset of  the taxable activity), the person is deemed to make a supply of the asset by transfer of ownership. This ensures the supply of the debt security may still be treated as an exempt financial service. Levy paid under Climate Change Response Act 2002 — s 5(6AA) The synthetic greenhouse gas levy paid under the Climate Change Response Act 2002 is treated as if it were consideration for a supply of services in furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by the New Zealand Transport Agency if the levy is paid on a leviable motor vehicle, or the Environmental Protection Authority if it is paid on leviable goods, and is subject to GST. Land transport fees and charges — s 5(6AAB) Land transport fees and charges (made under the regulation-making power in s 167(1)(j) of the Land Transport Act 1998) and paid to a person are treated as consideration for the supply of services in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity by the person. Motor vehicle registration and licence fees — s 5(6A) The New Zealand Transport Agency is deemed to make a supply of services when receiving motor vehicle registration and licence fees. That supply is deemed to be made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by the New Zealand Transport Agency (s 5(6A)). Therefore, the fees are subject to GST. Fire service levy — s 5(6AB) The fire service levy that is collected by insurance companies as part of the fire and general insurance premium is treated as a supply to the insured person in the course of a taxable activity and is therefore subject to GST. The levy is paid to Fire and Emergency New Zealand. Interest and penalties imposed on the insurance company to ensure correct and prompt payment of levy funds are exempt from GST. Waste disposal levy — s 5(6AC) Section 5(6AC) specifies that the three central payments made in relation to the waste disposal levy payable under the Waste Minimisation Act 2008 are consideration for a supply of services made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity and those supplies  are subject to GST. These payments will give rise to input tax credits when they are made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. Road user charges — s 5(6B) Road user charges are deemed to be consideration for a supply made by the New Zealand Transport Agency in the course of its taxable activity. Regional fuel tax — s 5(6BB) Regional fuel tax (RFT) paid is treated as consideration for a supply of services by the New Zealand Transport Agency, as agency for the relevant local authority. An RFT rebate paid to a registered person is treated as being consideration for a supply of services in the course of the registered person’s taxable activity to the extent the RFT rebate relates to fuel used, or available for use, by the person for making taxable supplies. The supplies are therefore subject to GST. Election deposits — s 5(6C), (6CA) Deposits paid by candidates in local body and general elections are deemed to be consideration for the supply of services in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. The supply is deemed to take place if and when the deposit is forfeited. On forfeiture, the requisite body is required to account for the output tax on the deposit. Grants and subsidies paid by the Crown or a public authority — s 5(6D), (6E) All payments in the nature of grants and subsidies paid by the Crown or a public authority for a registered person’s taxable activity are deemed to be consideration for the supply of goods and services in the course or furtherance of that person’s taxable activity. Therefore, GST must be accounted for. However, government grants applied to exempt activities are not subject to GST. For example, a grant made to a non-profit body that provides budgetary services through non-paid volunteers may be exempt from GST (see Case M40 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,247). Section 5(6D) requires a payment to be made in relation to a person’s “taxable activity”. Where the taxpayer is not required to and does not  supply goods or services to any third party in return for the grant or subsidy this section has no application. See Chatham Islands Enterprise Trust v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,075 (CA) and C of IR v New Zealand Refining Co Ltd (1997) 18 NZTC 13,187 (CA). There is no exhaustive statutory definition of the term “grant or subsidy”, although certain payments are specifically included or excluded from the term. Suspensory loans or advances that become non-repayable because the conditions for non-repayment are satisfied are specific payments that are included within the term “payment in the nature of a grant or subsidy” and are therefore subject to GST. Income tax refunds do not come within the definition of a “payment in the nature of a grant or subsidy” and are not subject to GST (see Tax Education Office Newsletter No 42, 5 July 1991 at 11). Payments of the kind specified in the Schedule to the Goods and Services Tax (Grants and Subsidies) Order 1992 are declared not to be taxable grants or subsidies for the purposes of s 5(6D) — see cl 2 of the Order. For example, cl 9 of the schedule provides that any earthquake support subsidy payment made on or before 26 May 2017 in relation to the earthquakes that occurred on 14 November 2016 in Hurunui and Kaikoura or any of their aftershocks was not a taxable grant or subsidy. In addition, the combination of s 89 of the GST Act and cl 10 and cl 11 of the schedule provide that any payment made by the Ministry of Social Development on or after 17 March 2020 in relation to leave taken, wages or other income as a consequence of COVID-19 is also not a taxable grant or subsidy. For a discussion of the COVID-19 wage subsidy, see ¶5-765. Where an entity receives grant money on behalf of another entity, it will not be liable for GST. It is the actual recipient of the grant who must account for output tax. For example, local authorities act as agents for the Hillary Commission in the distribution of funds to the various cultural and sporting bodies. The grants are not subject to GST in the hands of the local authorities as agents. However, output tax must be accounted for on grants paid to registered cultural and sporting bodies for taxable activities.  ▸Note: In September 2020, the Commissioner released a statement, CS 20/05, “GST treatment of payments received by a GST registered body corporate from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment under the Leaky Homes Financial Assistance Package (FAP)” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 10, November 2020 at 2). The Commissioner considers that a payment under the FAP scheme from MBIE on behalf of the Crown to a body corporate is not a payment in respect of any actual supply of goods and services made by the body corporate in return for that payment. However, the Commissioner considers that these payments are in the nature of a grant or subsidy from the Crown under s 5(6D), and therefore are deemed to be in response to a supply from the body corporate. As a result, these payments are subject to GST. A GST-registered body corporate that receives such payments is therefore obliged to include the GST component in its GST return and to pay any net GST output tax. A body corporate that is not registered (and not liable to be registered) for GST will not be obliged to account for GST. Payments by the Crown or social housing agency — s 5(6F) Amounts payable by the Crown or the social housing agency under the Public and Community Housing Management Act 1992 under reimbursement agreements and tailored agreements are treated as consideration for the supply of accommodation in a dwelling by way of hire. These amounts are therefore exempt from GST: see ¶32-052. Levy payable for supply of eligible infrastructure — s 5(7F) The Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act 2020 (IFFA) has introduced a new funding and financing model to support the provision of infrastructure for housing and urban development. The IFFA allows for the use of a multi-year levy to fund eligible infrastructure that is to be paid by the beneficiaries of the infrastructure projects over the relevant period. When a person is liable to pay a levy set under s 40 of the IFFA, the levy is treated as being consideration for a supply of goods and services to the person by the responsible Special Purpose Vehicle (being the entity responsible for the financing and construction of the relevant infrastructure assets). The levy is therefore subject to GST. Racing club or racing code prizes — s 5(11CB)  A prize received from a racing club or racing code for the performance in a race of a horse or greyhound is treated as consideration for services provided by the registered person to the racing club or racing code under s 5(11CB). The section only applies if the prize is received by a registered person in the course of a taxable activity. This codifies a practice of accounting for GST on race winnings used by the racing industry. Tokens, stamps and vouchers — s 5(11D)–(11I) The issue or sale of a token, stamp or voucher is treated as a supply of goods or services. However, where tokens, stamps and vouchers with a face value are concerned, the supplier has the option of treating the redemption, rather than the issue or sale, of the token, stamp or voucher as a supply of goods or services by the redeemer if: ▪ the supply is a supply of remote services or of distantly taxable goods, or ▪ it is not practical for the issue or sale to be treated as a supply of goods or services, and the person issuing or selling the token, stamp or voucher and the person supplying the goods or services specified in the token, stamp or voucher agree. A situation in which it may not be practical for the issue of a token, stamp or voucher to be treated as a supply of goods or services is when the issuer or seller of the token, stamp or voucher and the supplier of the relevant goods and services are two different people. The intended application of s 5(11G) requires that there is an agreement between the issuer/seller and the supplier to this effect, or that the issuer/seller is party to such an agreement. However, no such agreement is required if the issuer/seller of the voucher and the supplier of the goods and services are the same person. The redemption option does not apply to tokens, stamps and vouchers sold to a non-resident for services performed in New Zealand. The supplier has to account for GST on these items when the customer buys them. See s 11A(2). The redemption option also  does not apply to all postage stamps. In addition, if the consideration received for the supply is more than the face value of the token/stamp/voucher, the issue or sale of the token/stamp/voucher is treated as a supply. A supply does not occur if one registered person issues or sells a token, stamp or voucher to another registered person who subsequently on-sells the token/stamp/voucher, unless the original issuer/seller actually supplies the goods and services when the token/stamp/voucher is redeemed. Example 1: Airport Transfers Ltd issues a voucher to Travel Agent Corp that entitles the bearer to transfers to and from Auckland Airport. Travel Agent Corp sells the voucher to a customer who is travelling to and from Auckland. If Airport Transfers Ltd provides the transfers, a supply occurs when the voucher is originally issued.  Disposal of taxable activity as a going concern — s 5(12) The disposition of a taxable activity as a going concern is deemed to be a supply of goods made in the course of a taxable activity. This will render the disposition to be taxable if all the necessary criteria are met. The GST status of a “supply of a taxable activity as a going concern” is discussed at ¶32-035. Insurance payments — s 5(13) A supply of services is deemed to be made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity if a registered person receives an insurance payment for a loss incurred while carrying on a taxable activity. Example 2: Dan Driver is a GST-registered courier. A truck runs into his van while Dan is working, causing $3,000 worth of damage. The truck owner admits liability. Dan receives a cheque from the truck owner’s insurance company for $3,000. Dan has to pay output tax of $391.30 (3/23 of $3,000) and the insurance company can claim an input tax credit of $391.30.  Insurance is defined for GST purposes as “insurance or guarantee against loss, damage, injury or risk of any kind