 file their return before the due date, the earlier of: □ the day on which the return is filed, or □ the day after the end of the GST return period in which the refund relates. ▪ for taxpayers who file their return on the due date, the day after the end of the GST period in which the refund arose, and ▪ for taxpayers who file after the due date, the day the return is filed. Transfer of tax from one taxpayer to another Tax may be transferred from a taxpayer to: (1) a company in the same group of companies (2) a shareholder-employee of the taxpayer (3) a company in which the taxpayer is a shareholder-employee (4) a partner in the same partnership (5) a relative (6) a trustee of a family trust of which the taxpayer is a beneficiary (7) a tax pooling intermediary’s tax pooling account (8) another taxpayer not listed above, or (9) if the taxpayer is a trustee of a family trust, a beneficiary of the trust. Effective date  In the case of transfers listed from (1) to (6) and (9), the effective date of the transfer is the same as that discussed above. In the case of a transfer listed in (7), the effective date of the transfer is the date of the request or a later date. In the case of a transfer listed in (8), the effective date of the transfer is the later of the following dates: ▪ a date occurring on or after the date of the request, and ▪ a date occurring after the date the relevant return is filed for the period in which the excess arose. If an effective date of transfer is not chosen by the taxpayer or his or her agent, the transfer may be made on a date the Commissioner considers to be appropriate. If the Commissioner determines the effective date of transfer, the taxpayer or his or her agent may subsequently request an effective date as outlined above. Where the Commissioner has applied all or part of a taxpayer’s overpayment in satisfaction of tax (or another amount) due, the taxpayer or his or her agent may request that the Commissioner apply all or part of the overpayment on a date allowed by ss 173L and 173M (see above). Charitable donations tax credit refund The transfer (requested by a taxpayer) of a refund arising from the charitable donations tax credit is effective only on the later of: ▪ a day occurring on or after the date of request, and ▪ a day occurring after the date on which the application for the charitable donation tax credit is made. Transfers of interest Taxpayers or their agents may also request transfers of interest paid by the Commissioner on overpaid tax. The effective date of such a transfer is the date on which the interest would have been payable by the Commissioner under the interest rules had the request for its transfer not been made.  Definitions for tax transfer provisions There are specific definitions of “family trust” and “relative” for the purposes of the tax transfer provisions (see s 173M(5) and (6) of the TAA). “Family trust” means a trust established primarily to benefit: (a) a natural person for whom the settlor has natural love and affection (b) an organisation or a trust with income that is exempt under s CW 41 or CW 42 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (ie charitable entities), or (c) a natural person who satisfies (a) and an organisation or a trust that satisfies (b) above. “Relative” means a person connected by blood relationship (being parent and child), marriage, civil union or de facto relationship or adoption. Specifically in relation to transfers of overpaid provisional tax, see ¶22-140. Companies Specific provision is made for companies that have paid excess tax that is retained by IR because of insufficient imputation credits. The excess amount that has not been refunded or allocated within a wholly-owned group of companies can be credited as at a date on which the company has no provisional tax liability but has underpaid residual income tax subject to use of money interest. See s RM 16. Operational position In February 2020, IR released an operational position, OP 20/01, “Part 10B transfers of excess tax, effective date of ICA entries”, which considers the effect on the imputation credit account (ICA) of both transferor and transferee companies of requests to transfer tax to a date in the past (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 2, March 2020 at 13).  The Commissioner considers the correct position is that an ICA must have entries recorded as at the date of transfer, ie the effective date chosen. It is not appropriate to record the entries as at the later date IR processes the request to transfer excess tax. The operational position states the Commissioner will adjust, and apply the correct view of the law, when an audit or investigation uncovers incorrect ICA entries or where incorrect entries are identified when processing a transfer request to an earlier period. However, the Commissioner will not devote resources to identifying adjustments to ICA accounts and assessments affected by an incorrect transfer date being used for a transfer of excess tax under Part 10B of the TAA where transfers have been requested before 5 February 2020. Law: IT07 ss RM 10(2), RM 16; TAA ss 3(1), 173K–173O, 173S, 173T  ¶2-150 Offset of excess tax when assessment reopened On the investigation of a taxpayer’s returns over a number of years, it may be found that tax has been overpaid. At the Commissioner’s discretion, subject to limits on refunds and allocations of tax, any such overpaid tax within that group of years may be offset against tax payable in respect of any of the other years covered by the investigation. Law: TAA s 166  ¶2-155 Small amounts of refund or tax payable The Commissioner has a discretion to write off tax, refrain from making an assessment, or refrain from collecting tax if the balance of the tax payable is not more than $20 or the tax paid, withheld or deducted is not more than $5. Law: TAA s 174AA  ¶2-160 Refund of tax subsequently exempted by Order in Council The Commissioner may refund tax previously paid that is subsequently exempted by any Order in Council arising out of a double taxation agreement if application for the refund is made within four years after the date of the Order in Council. The time limits for the payment of tax refunds (see ¶2-145) do not apply in this case. Law: TAA s 184  RECOVERY OF TAX ¶2-165 Recovery of tax The Commissioner has special powers enabling her to enforce payment of income tax under Pt 10 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. She has the power to impose civil penalties, and to sue in the District Court for overdue tax (although s 86 of the District Court Act 2016 may give the defendant the right to require the proceedings to be transferred to the High Court). She also has the power to require deductions from employers, PAYE intermediaries or sub-debtors in respect of overdue tax of employees or head debtors and to require periodic deductions from bank accounts. Any action or remedy for the recovery of tax is not barred by the Limitation Act 2010 or any other statute prescribing a limitation period. Normally, action for recovery of outstanding simple debts may not be taken after the expiry of six years from the date the debt was incurred. In proceedings for the recovery of tax, costs may be awarded to or against the Commissioner. Law: TAA ss 156, 157, 161, 163  ¶2-170 Recovery of tax in the District Court The District Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings initiated by the Commissioner for the recovery of tax. Those  proceedings may be for the recovery of all or part of the tax owing under an assessment when payment of that tax is not in dispute or they may be for the recovery of a deferred tax payment because of an objection to the assessment. Tax that is not in dispute may be severed and recovered despite the presence of challenge proceedings. In the latter instance, the recovery proceedings may be instituted only after the challenge has been finally resolved. Law: TAA s 156  ¶2-175 Recovery of tax from agent The Commissioner has full power to recover the overdue tax of a principal from the actual or constructive agent of that principal. However, any person who pays tax on behalf of another is entitled to recover the amount of the tax from that other person. He or she may recover that money as a debt or by retaining that sum from any moneys due to that other person. Law: TAA s 165  ¶2-180 Recovery of tax deductions from bankrupt/liquidated employer or PAYE intermediary It has generally been considered that the Commissioner is simply an unsecured creditor with no preferential powers of recovery in the event of the bankruptcy or liquidation of the employer, or the PAYE intermediary, with any trust under s 167 ceasing on the bankruptcy or liquidation. This was confirmed by the Supreme Court in Jennings Roadfreight Ltd (in liq) v C of IR (No 2) (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-108. In an earlier decision, the Court of Appeal had concluded that where s 167(1) applied the trust remained in existence upon liquidation and therefore the Commissioner was entitled to payment of the PAYE owing, as opposed to being subject to the ranking provided for in sch 7 of the Companies Act 1993. Only if the PAYE has not been dealt with properly and fell within s 167(2) would the sch 7 ranking apply.  However, the Supreme Court allowed the appeal by Jennings and confirmed that upon the liquidation of Jennings the unpaid (and overdue) PAYE was dealt with under s 167(2) and was therefore subject to the sch 7 ranking. Section 167(1) does not apply to such amounts, unless (possibly) unpaid PAYE deducted has been segregated by the employer in a separate account. Amounts of PAYE that fall due for payment after liquidation will, however, remain subject to s 167(1). See further at ¶16-850. Where the PAYE has not been dealt with properly and falls within s 167(2), the Commissioner does have priority in regard to unpaid PAYE tax and certain ACC levy deductions where the employer is an individual. The Commissioner’s priority to these deductions ranks immediately after preferential claims for wages or other sums payable to any of the bankrupt’s employees. Where the employer or the PAYE intermediary is a company in liquidation, the Commissioner’s priority to unpaid tax deductions has the ranking provided for in sch 7 to the Companies Act (see ¶16-850), whether or not the company is incorporated or registered under that Act. The Official Assignee, when carrying on the business of a bankrupt, is personally liable to pay the income tax imposed on the revenue profits earned during the period he or she is carrying on that business. Example: The Court of Appeal overturned a judgment of the High Court and held that the payments of outstanding PAYE, GST, and penalties made by a company before liquidation could not be set aside by the liquidator. Briefly, the company was served with a statutory demand for the outstanding taxes approximately two and a half months before it was placed into voluntary liquidation. All outstanding taxes were paid about a month before liquidation. The Commissioner conceded that at the times the relevant tax payments were made the company was unable to pay its due debts. It was held that the amounts retained by the employer-company as PAYE deductions were subject to a trust in favour of the Commissioner under s 167(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. As such, they did not form part of the estate in liquidation. The statutory trust created by s 167(1) of the Tax Administration Act did not require the employer to keep a separate bank account for the PAYE deductions, nor could the trust be terminated by the employer’s failure to pay the deductions to the Commissioner on time (ie s 167(2) of the Tax Administration Act does not terminate the trust created by s 167(1)). It was further held that s 167(2) of the Tax Administration Act did not apply in this case as the tax payments were made before  the company being put into liquidation. See C of IR v Smith (2000) 19 NZTC 15,541 (CA).  Law: TAA s 167  ¶2-185 Recovery of excess tax credits Section 165A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 makes it clear that the Commissioner has the power to recover excess tax credits that have been allowed to a taxpayer. The power of recovery under s 165A is expressly subject to: ▪ the use of excess tax credits to settle income tax liability and treatment of remaining credits. See ss LA 3–LA 5 and ¶11-010 ▪ refund or repayment of foreign tax. See s LJ 7 ▪ tax credits that are available for use in the next tax year. See LK 4. The Commissioner’s powers of recovery are the same as those, with necessary modifications, for income tax payable by a person. Law: TAA s 165A  ¶2-190 Attachment notice/notice to deduct The Commissioner can recover outstanding tax liabilities by requiring people holding funds payable to the person to pay those funds directly to the Commissioner. Known as “attachment notices” or “notices to deduct”, the notices cover such tax liabilities as income tax, GST, interest (including daily interest), KiwiSaver contributions and penalties. Section 157 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) specifically covers income tax liabilities, but similar provisions are contained in the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (s 43), the Child Support Act 1991 (s 154), the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (s 193), the Gaming Duties Act 1971 (s 12L) and the various Accident Compensation Acts. The power of the Commissioner to issue  notices under s 157 was considered by the High Court in Chesterfield Preschools Ltd v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,275. Attachment notices are also used to recover tax debts from absconding debtors from other jurisdictions. The definition of “income tax” in s 157 includes an amount of unpaid tax subject to Pt 10A (tax recovery agreements) of the TAA. Also, for the purposes of s 157, the term includes amounts paid to a provisional tax pooling account, an amount payable in relation to a loan made under the small business cashflow scheme (see ¶1-530), and an amount payable in relation to a grant made under the COVID-19 resurgence support payments scheme (see ¶5-765). Whether amounts may be attached The payments that the Commissioner may attach include salary and wages and certain money held on deposit with a “bank” (as defined in s 157(10)) and can extend to amounts that become payable to the person subsequent to the date of the notice. However, it is specifically provided that the Commissioner may not attach a home layby account under the Post Office Act 1959 (repealed by the Post Office Act Repeal Act 1987). Before 21 December 2010 the Commissioner could not, in most circumstances, attach any funds held in a joint account if the other person or persons who held the account were not tax defaulters. See, for example, C of IR v ANZ Banking Group (New Zealand) Ltd (1998) 18 NZTC 13,643. However, this position was changed so that the Commissioner can attach funds held in a joint bank account where the defaulting taxpayer can make withdrawals from the account without the signature of the other person. Funds may also be attached where the legislation in question gives the Commissioner the specific authority to attach funds held in joint accounts — as is the case with debts owed to the Commissioner under the Child Support Act or the Working for Families tax credit provisions in the Income Tax Act 2007 (see s MF 5(2)). How Commissioner exercises the power of attachment  To exercise these powers of attachment, the Commissioner must give notice requiring the person owing moneys to the taxpayer to deduct a specified sum. The deduction may be in one lump sum or by instalments. The sum specified in the notice is the amount up to which the deduction is required to be made. Any amount deducted in accordance with this procedure is credited towards reduction of the arrears of tax or penalty owing when received by the Commissioner. A copy must be provided to the taxpayer at the time the notice is given. Any amount deducted under this procedure is to be held in trust for the Crown and is recoverable as if it were income tax payable by the person who made the deduction. Example 1: If a bank receives a payment from which the tax is to be deducted, the bank is deemed to be holding the whole of the payment in trust for the Crown. If the bank does not deduct the tax, the amount may be recovered from the bank. The bank is the deemed agent of the taxpayer and an indemnity applies in respect of such deduction.  A pay as you earn (PAYE) intermediary is also subject to the Commissioner’s powers of attachment. The Commissioner may require an employer to make deductions from a person’s wages or salary without the Commissioner having to concurrently notify the taxpayer employee. The Commissioner still has the general requirement to issue a copy of the deduction notice to the taxpayer. However, the Commissioner is not prevented from issuing the deduction notice where the Commissioner cannot issue a copy of the notice because, after making reasonable inquiries, she does not have the person’s most recent address. Maximum level that employers may deduct There is a cap on the amount the Commissioner may require an employer, or a PAYE intermediary, to deduct each week from the salary or wages payable to an employee who is in arrears with payment of tax. The maximum amount that can be deducted is the greater of:  ▪ 10% per week of the tax due or 20% of gross salary or wages, whichever is the lesser, or ▪ $10 per week. Example 2: Ida owns the “Plants ‘R’ Green” nursery, specialising in citrus trees. The nursery is expanding rapidly, so she employs Bella. Bella owes $1,768.50 in unpaid taxes from the time she had been self-employed as a line dance instructor. Ida receives a s 157 notice, requiring her to deduct amounts from Bella’s pay of $295 per week. Ida must deduct either $59, which is the lesser of 10% of the unpaid taxes ($176.85) or 20% of the wages ($59), or $10, whichever is the greater. As $59 is greater than $10, Ida must return this amount under the s 157 notice. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 9, February 1995 at 8.  Since an attachment order interferes with the rights of the person, the legislation authorising it must be followed exactly. See Anzamco Ltd (in liq) v Bank of New Zealand (1982) 5 NZTC 61,249. The Commissioner has the power to issue an attachment notice to “any person” who owes money to a defaulting taxpayer. The High Court has held that there is no reason why the Commissioner cannot herself, as the creditor of one person (ie where tax is owing), give notice to herself as the debtor of another person (ie where a tax refund is due to that person). See FB Duvall Ltd v C of IR (No 2) (1998) 18 NZTC 13,943. Interest payable The sum specified in the notice of the amount to be deducted may include a daily amount of interest. This interest is calculated daily commencing on the date of the notice and ending on the day the sum required by the notice is deducted or extracted. See s 157(1A) and (1B) of the TAA. Bank accounts: standard practice statement Standard practice statement SPS 11/04, “Compulsory deductions from bank accounts”, was published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 5, June 2011 at 13. It applies from 29 April 2011.  In summary, Inland Revenue’s (IR) statement makes the following points: ▪ Monitoring of bank accounts: Although deduction notices may require deductions from deposits made after the date on the notice, banks will not generally be required to monitor bank accounts on a daily basis. On receipt of a deduction notice the bank is required to check the customer’s account and deduct funds that are available at the time. If no funds are available, the bank need only advise IR of this fact. However, IR reserves that right to require daily monitoring of bank accounts where it is considered necessary. Any monitoring that is required will be for a maximum of 10 working days, unless exceptional circumstances exist. ▪ Overdraft facilities: The Commissioner cannot, by requiring a deduction to be made from a bank account, put a taxpayer into (or further into) overdraft. However, where the taxpayer attempts to move funds to avoid compliance with the deduction notice, the notice will take priority. ▪ Term investment accounts: Compulsory deductions can be made from money held in a term investment before the date that the investment is due to mature. ▪ Joint accounts: IR reserves the right to issue a deduction notice in relation to a joint account when the money is able to be withdrawn from the account by the defaulting person without the signature or other authorisation of the other account holder. ▪ Prosecution: IR has the power to prosecute where the terms of a deduction notice are not complied with by a bank. ▸ Note: In December 2020, Inland Revenue released a draft standard practice statement, ED0224, “Deduction notices”, which is intended to replace SPS 11/04 when finalised. The draft statement is wider in scope than SPS 11/04 and deals more generally with Inland Revenue’s power to issue a deduction notice to recover outstanding  amounts of tax from any third party. The draft item provides guidance on how the Commissioner will use such notices. Failure to comply with attachment notice Every person, other than an employer, who fails to make any deduction required by the Commissioner under an attachment notice or who, having made the deduction, fails to pay it to the Commissioner within the time specified in the notice is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $25,000 for the first offence and up to $50,000 for subsequent offences, but is not liable to pay interest or civil penalties. Law: TAA ss 143A, 157, 157A  EMPLOYERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES Background to employers’ responsibilities  ¶3-005  Checklist of employer’s duties  ¶3-010  Employers’ Responsibilities Generally  ¶3-011  Particular Classes of Earnings and Earners ¶3-180 Independent Contractor or Employee  ¶3-376  Employee Allowances  ¶3-420  Other Employee Payments  ¶3-450  PAYE Intermediaries  ¶3-474  ¶3-005 Background to employers’ responsibilities Income derived from salary or wages has PAYE (pay as you earn) deducted by the employer and paid to Inland Revenue (IR) on specific days of the month. A new employer must register with IR. Tax is deducted and paid progressively to IR throughout the year. The PAYE regime also requires employers to account for employer superannuation cash contributions, ACC levies, student loan repayments, KiwiSaver contributions and child support. Tax deductions are required to be made from “PAYE income payments” by the persons making those payments at the time the payments are made. The most common type of PAYE income payment is salary or wages. An employer’s responsibilities will differ depending upon whether the person providing the service is an employee or independent contractor. For this reason, it is important to distinguish between the  two types of workers. In some cases, withholding tax may have to be deducted from payments made to independent contractors. Employers may transfer their PAYE obligations to a PAYE intermediary. Law: IT07 ss RA 5(1)(a), (2), RD 1, RD 2, RD 10  ¶3-010 Checklist of employer’s duties The routine duties of an employer in relation to the PAYE system and employee remuneration (including schedular payments) are summarised below: ▪ new employee: □ obtain a completed tax code declaration form (IR 330) showing the tax code appropriate to the new employee’s circumstances. This form is to be retained by the employer and kept with the employer’s business records for a minimum of seven years after the last salary/wages payment made to the employee. The non-notified tax code rate of 45¢ in the dollar, plus earners’ levy, should be used if the employee has not completed form IR 330: see ¶3-030 □ give the new employee (excluding employees not automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver) a Your introduction to KiwiSaver — employee information (KS 3) fact sheet, a KiwiSaver deduction form (KS 2) and a New employee optout request form (KS 10) within seven days of their start date. If the employer has a chosen KiwiSaver scheme, the employer must provide the scheme’s investment statement and advise new employees in writing that they will be allocated to that scheme unless they choose their own □ obtain from the new employee a completed KS 2 or KS 10. If the employee provides nothing, KiwiSaver contributions should be deducted at the default contribution rate of 3%  □ complete a KiwiSaver enrolment form (KS 1) for the new employee if the employee is not already a KiwiSaver member and submit to Inland Revenue (IR) with the next employment information. For more information on KiwiSaver see ¶29-200 ▪ each pay day: deduct the appropriate amount of tax each pay day for each employee and make a record of overtime and shift work hours ▪ PAYE: pay PAYE deductions to IR once a month by the 20th (or, in the case of large employers, twice-monthly by the 5th and the 20th): see ¶3-020 ▪ employment information: file an employment information form (IR 348) on a payday or twice-monthly basis: see ¶3-023 ▪ schedular payments: tax must be withheld from payments made to certain contract workers (see ¶3-044), and such workers should either fill in an IR 330C (tax rate notification for contractors form) or have tax deducted at the no-notification rate ▪ termination of employment: when an employer stops employing employees permanently, the employer has 30 working days after the date they stop employing to notify the Commissioner: see ¶3-110 ▪ accident insurance: pay ACC work account levies to fund the cost of work place accidents, including any residual claims levy: see ¶31-010 et seq ▪ ACC earners’ levy: deduct earners’ levy from salary and wages paid to employees to cover non-work-related injuries (the earners’ levy is built into the PAYE tables): see ¶31-048 ▪ employee and employer KiwiSaver contributions: if payable, these must be paid along with PAYE deductions by the due date for those deductions: see ¶29-230  ▪ employer’s superannuation contribution tax: if payable, this must be paid along with PAYE deductions by the due date for those PAYE deductions: see ¶3-101 ▪ child support deductions: if any, these are due to IR by the 20th of the month following the month of deduction or, in the case of large employers, they may choose to pay these on the 5th and 20th of each month: see ¶3-025 ▪ student loan deductions: if any, these must be paid along with PAYE deductions by the due date for those deductions: see ¶8055 ▪ fringe benefits: an employer must account for any fringe benefits provided to employees either on a quarterly, income year or annual basis: see ¶21-010 et seq, and ▪ payroll donations: an employer must, if they have elected to participate in the payroll giving scheme, transfer donations to the relevant donee organisation within the specified time period and keep a record of the amounts transferred and the tax credits attached for each pay period. See ¶11-063.  EMPLOYERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES GENERALLY ¶3-011 Employee, employer defined An employee is defined generally as any person who receives or is entitled to receive a PAYE income payment. An employer is any person who pays or is liable to pay a PAYE income payment and includes: ▪ the manager or principal officer in the case of an unincorporated body of persons, excluding a partnership ▪ each partner in a partnership  ▪ a look-through company ▪ each person in whom property has become vested or to whom control of property has passed in the case of a deceased estate, a trust, a company in liquidation, an assigned estate, or in any other case, and ▪ the Crown. For the definitions of employee and employer for the purposes of the FBT regime, see ¶21-040 and ¶21-050. Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶3-012 PAYE income payments defined PAYE income payments PAYE income payments (previously referred to as “source deduction payments”) can be any of a wide variety of payments. In s RD 3 a “PAYE income payment” means: ▪ a payment of salary or wages (see s RD 5 and ¶3-016) ▪ extra pay (see s RD 7 and ¶3-221) ▪ a schedular payment (see s RD 8 and ¶3-044). PAYE income payments do not include: ▪ amounts attributed to a working person under the attribution rules ▪ personal service rehabilitation payments paid by a claimant under the Accident Compensation Act 2001 from which tax has been withheld (see s RD 3(1)(b)(iii)) ▪ an amount paid to a shareholder-employee in the circumstances set out in s RD 3B or s RD 3C (see below).  Shareholder-employees Section RD 3B provides that in the case of a person who is a shareholder and an employee of a close company (but not a lookthrough company) or a company with 25 or fewer shareholders, employment income is deemed to be derived other than by way of PAYE income payments if the person so elects and, throughout the income year: ▪ the person does not derive payments of salary or wages of a regular amount for regular pay periods of one month or less as an employee ▪ the person derives less than 66% of their annual gross income as an employee from payments of salary or wages of a regular amount for regular pay periods, or ▪ an amount is paid as income that subsequently may be allocated to the person as an employee for the income year. Where any one of the above criteria is met, the employment income of the shareholder‐employee for the income year and later income years is deemed to be derived otherwise than from PAYE income payments. This treatment applies to directors’ fees, salary or wages or other income received in the capacity of employee from the company. This income is thus brought within the provisional tax system. Section RD 3C provides that shareholder-employees of close companies or companies with 25 or fewer shareholders who receive both regular salary or wages throughout the year and variable amounts of other employment income may elect to have their income split so that the base salary is subject to PAYE and the variable amount is paid out before tax (and thus likely to be subject to provisional tax). Law: IT07 ss RD 3, RD 3B, RD 3C  ¶3-015 Timing of deductibility of employment income  For an amount incurred by an employer in respect of an employee (employment income) to be deductible, it must be paid within a statutory time period. For employees other than shareholderemployees, the employment income must be paid in the income year the deduction is claimed or, if the employer chooses, within 63 days after the end of the income year in which the deduction is claimed. For shareholder employees, the employment income must be paid in the income year or, if the employer chooses, by the last day the person could file a return of income for the income year. If the employment expenditure is not paid by the relevant date, the unpaid amount is income of the person in the income year under s CH 3. If an amount is treated as income under s CH 3, the amount should qualify for a deduction in the following income year under s DB 51. For the rules governing the deductibility of wage-related provisions (for example, a provision for holiday pay) on the sale of a business, see ¶10-052 and ¶10-292. Law: IT07 ss CH 3, DB 51, EA 4, EI 9  ¶3-016 Salary or wages defined “Salary or wages” is defined in s RD 5 as any salary, wages or allowances made to a person in connection with their employment, including: ▪ overtime pay, bonuses, gratuities, commissions or other pay of any kind: see s RD 5(1)(b)(i) ▪ expenditure on account of an employee: see s RD 5(2) and ¶3018 ▪ periodic payments by way of pension, allowance or annuity made to a person or their spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner, child or dependant in connection with the person’s past employment: see s RD 5(4)  ▪ payment to working owners of look-through companies under s DC 3B and payments by a partnership to a working partner pursuant to a contract of service: see s RD 5(3) and (3B) ▪ a gratuitous payment for services within paragraph (a) of the definition of “pension” in s CF 1(2): see s RD 5(6)(a) ▪ any salary or allowance paid to a member of Parliament: see s RD 5(5) ▪ any salary or principal allowance paid to a judicial officer: see s RD 5(5) ▪ any salary or allowances paid to a member of the Employment Relations Authority: see s RD 5(5) ▪ any salary paid to the Governor-General and any payment to the Governor-General on cessation of holding office: see s RD 5(5) and (5B) and ¶5-598 ▪ income-tested benefits, veterans’ pensions (other than certain pensions paid overseas) and New Zealand superannuation (other than certain superannuation paid overseas): see s RD 5(6)(b)–(bc) ▪ all parental leave and preterm baby payments made under Pt 7A of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987: see s RD 5(7) ▪ basic grants and independent circumstances grants made under regulations made under s 645 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (prior to 1 August 2020, s 193 of the Education Act 1964 or s 303 of the Education Act 1989) or an enactment substituted for that section: see s RD 5(6)(c) ▪ an accident compensation earnings-related payment: see s RD 5(1)(b)(iii)  ▪ a payment of earnings compensation under the Compensation for Live Organ Donors Act 2016: see RD 5(1)(b)(iiib) ▪ a retirement lump sum paid under Pt 5 subpart 7 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014: see s RD 5(6)(bd) ▪ weekly income compensation, weekly compensation or aggregated payments paid under certain provisions of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014: s RD 5(6)(be)–(bg) ▪ the amount of an honorarium paid by Fire and Emergency New Zealand to a volunteer: see s RD 5(6)(bh) ▪ the provision of accommodation or an accommodation allowance under s CE 1(1)(bb): see s RD 5(8) ▪ an employer’s superannuation cash contribution that an employee chooses to have treated as salary or wages under s RD 68: see s RD 5(9) ▪ an unrepaid PAYE income overpayment that is treated as salary or wages under s RD 8B(2)(a): see s RD 5(10). A slightly different definition of “salary or wages” applies for KiwiSaver purposes. See ¶29-230. Law: IT07 s RD 5  ¶3-017 Exclusions from salary or wages Several items are expressly excluded from the definition of “salary or wages”. These are: ▪ payments of exempt income, extra pays or schedular payments ▪ any employer’s superannuation contribution (other than a cash contribution an employee chooses to have treated as salary or wages), and  ▪ any payment that is declared by regulation not to be salary or wages. Law: IT07 s RD 5(1)(c)  ¶3-018 Meaning of expenditure on account of employee “Expenditure on account of an employee” is broadly defined as a payment made by an employer relating to expenditure incurred, or to be incurred, by an employee, but does not include: ▪ expenditure for the benefit of an employee or a reimbursement that is exempt income to the employee under s CW 17 (see ¶3435) ▪ an amount paid under: □ ss CW 16B to CW 16F, which relate to accommodation expenditure (see ¶3-425) □ s CW 17B, which relates to relocation payments (see ¶3446) □ s CW 17C, which relates to payments for overtime meals and sustenance allowances (see ¶3-448 and ¶3-449) □ s CW 17CB, which relates to payments for certain workrelated meals (see ¶3-448) □ s CW 17CC, which relates to payments for distinctive work clothing (see ¶3-430) □ s CW 18, which relates to payments for additional transport costs (see ¶3-445) ▪ expenditure, other than an amount to which the first bullet point above applies, that an employee pays in connection with their employment or service to the extent to which: □ the expenditure is incurred on their employer’s behalf, and  □ the employee pays it on their employer’s behalf ▪ expenditure on an employment-related loan to which the FBT rules apply ▪ an employer’s superannuation contribution, or ▪ a premium for income protection insurance that an employer is liable to pay or make a contribution towards for the benefit of an employee. Generally, expenditure on account of an employee includes expenditure incurred by an employee but paid for by the employer. This leads to a fine distinction with FBT. The difference between an amount subject to FBT or taxable as expenditure on account of an employee can be decided by considering where the liability for the expenditure giving rise to the benefit or expenditure rests. If liability rests with the employer, then this is a good indication that the FBT rules will apply to the expenditure. Where the expenditure is the employee’s liability, but it is met by the employer, then the expenditure on account rules are likely to apply. When an employer reimburses an employee for expenditure incurred in the course of the employer’s business, the employer is entitled to claim any relevant input tax credit that may be available for GST purposes — provided the employer holds the appropriate tax invoice. Law: IT07 s CE 5  ¶3-020 Payment of tax deductions to Commissioner Every employer or PAYE intermediary who makes tax deductions from PAYE income payments is required to pay those deductions to Inland Revenue (IR) on a regular basis together with any: ▪ payroll donations ▪ KiwiSaver deductions  ▪ KiwiSaver employer contributions ▪ child support deductions ▪ student loan deductions ▪ employer’s superannuation contributions paid and employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) deducted. The relevant employment income information must also be provided to the Commissioner by the dates set out in subpart 3C of the Tax Administration Act 1994. See discussion in ¶3-023. Payment dates PAYE deducted from employees is money held in trust for the Government. Therefore, IR will impose heavy penalties if that money is used for other purposes and not paid to the Government. PAYE deducted is payable either monthly or twice monthly, depending upon the employer’s total gross annual PAYE deductions and employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT). Earners’ levy, student loan repayments, KiwiSaver deductions and child support are not included in this amount. Large employers, with gross annual PAYE deductions and ESCT of $500,000 or more, must pay: ▪ deductions made in the period from the 1st to the 15th of the month, by the 20th of the same month, and ▪ deductions made in the period from the 16th to the end of the month, by the 5th of the following month (or 15 January when December is the month of the deductions). Small employers, with gross annual PAYE deductions and ESCT of less than $500,000, must pay deductions made during a month by the 20th of the following month. If the due date falls on a weekend or public holiday, payment can be made on the next working day without penalty.  For the purposes of calculating the $500,000 threshold, all partners in a partnership, all trustees in a trust, and all companies in a group of companies (ie the companies have a minimum 66% common shareholding) are treated as one employer. The threshold may be changed by Order in Council on the recommendation of the Minister of Revenue following appropriate consultation. When an employer ends their business and begins a new business, or operates two or more businesses at the same time, the gross tax deductions of all the businesses in question are aggregated. For the PAYE requirements on cessation of business, see ¶3-110. Law: IT07 ss RA 5, RA 15, RD 3, RD 4,  ¶3-021 Determining whether tax deduction should be made It is an offence not to make a tax deduction when one should be made. Failure to make a tax deduction is subject to the penalties regime as set out in ¶14-250. If a question arises as to whether the PAYE rules apply to all or part of a PAYE income payment the Commissioner must determine the matter: s RD 3(5). A taxpayer cannot directly dispute or challenge a s RD 3(5) determination under any tax statute. However, under s 138M of the Tax Administration Act 1994 a taxpayer may dispute a notice of proposed adjustment or challenge an assessment that is issued by the Commissioner in relation to an amount of tax withheld on the basis of a determination under s RD 3(5) on the ground that the determination is wrong in fact or in law. There is no other basis in tax law for disputing or challenging this type of determination. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 1, February 2004 at 22. Alteration to PAYE rates of tax deduction Where a tax rate or threshold change occurs that affects the amount of tax for a PAYE income payment, the rates and thresholds to be  applied are those in force on the date the PAYE income payment is paid or treated as paid: s RD 10C. Charitable trust liable for PAYE deductions A charitable trust that is an employer must deduct PAYE and other amounts even if the trust itself is exempt from tax. See Inland Revenue’s (IR) booklet “Charitable and donee organisations” IR 255, March 2020. Example: A charitable trust that engaged 12 previously unemployed workers under the New Zealand Employment Service Community Restart Programme to restore an old ship was liable for PAYE tax deductions and ACC levies. The charitable trust, rather than the New Zealand Employment Service (NZES), was the employer of the workers. The payments by the NZES were payments of subsidies and were not wages to the employees. See Case R23 (1994) 16 NZTC 6,108.  PAYE on income received fraudulently Under s CB 32 any property fraudulently obtained is assessable income. However, because the person is not entitled to receive the income it cannot be a PAYE income payment. If PAYE is deducted from the payment the Commissioner will repay the deduction to the payer on request in writing. The amount assessed to the recipient is the net amount of the fraudulent payment, ie the amount actually received by them. The recipient is then responsible for meeting their tax liability on that income. If the recipient repays any of the income they are entitled to a deduction for the amount repaid in the year it is repaid, pursuant to s DB 44. Law: IT07 ss CB 32, RD 3(5), RD 10C; TAA s 138M  ¶3-023 Employment income information on a payday basis Introduction  Employment income information must be provided on a payday basis with effect from 1 April 2019. Employer monthly schedules, PAYE income payment forms and PAYE income payment form periods have been replaced with new employment income information requirements. For a discussion of the reporting requirements before 1 April 2019, see CCH, 2019 New Zealand Master Tax Guide. Subpart 3C (Employment income information) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), consisting of ss 23B to 23Q, sets out: ▪ what is meant by employment income information for reporting purposes ▪ when employment income information must be provided to the Commissioner and how it must be delivered ▪ the information that must be provided for new and departing employees, and ▪ the rules for correction of errors. Employment income information Employment income information is defined as the items of information listed in sch 4, tables 1 to 3, that an employer must provide to the Commissioner. Table 1 specifies the information for reporting on a payday basis. This must be included on form IR 348, “Employment Information” and is as follows: ▪ employer’s name and tax file number ▪ the payday date ▪ for every employee who receives a PAYE income payment or benefit under an employee share scheme (ESS) — □ name and, if supplied to the employer, tax file number  □ tax code □ gross earnings (including the value of a benefit under an ESS) □ whether extra pays received and not taxed at correct rate □ total amount of tax withheld before tax credits taken into account □ amount of earnings not liable to the earner levy (including the value of a benefit under an ESS) ▪ for every employee, as applicable, the amount of— □ tax credits for payroll donations □ child support deductions □ student loan repayments □ employee and employer KiwiSaver contributions □ employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) ▪ for every former employee receiving a benefit under an ESS when employer has withheld tax for the benefit— □ name and, if supplied to the employer, tax file number □ value of the benefit □ amount of tax withheld, and ▪ other particulars as the Commissioner requires. Table 2 specifies the information that must be provided about new employees and table 3 deals with the information for departing employees. These information requirements are discussed below.  Form IR 337, “Completing Employment Information forms”, provides guidance on how to complete IR 346K and IR 348. Employers’ groups for delivery of information An employer is included in one of the three following groups of employer for the delivery of employment income information to the Commissioner: ▪ the online group ▪ the non-electronic group, or ▪ the new group. Online group The online group is the default group if the employer is not included in either of the other two groups. An employer in the online group has to deliver their employment income information for a payday in electronic form and by means of an electronic communication as prescribed by the Commissioner, and within two working days after payday. Online delivery of the information will be possible from within payroll software or using IR’s secure online service — myIR. Note that all PAYE intermediaries are included in the online group for the delivery of employment income information. In addition, any employer who delivers employment income information electronically, whether through a service or platform provided by the Commissioner or through the use of payroll software, is also included in the online group. Non-electronic group An employer is included in the non-electronic group if the combined gross PAYE and ESCT withheld for the preceding year is below the specified threshold of $50,000 or they have an exemption (see below) and they are not included in the online group or the new group. An employer in the non-electronic group has to deliver their employment income information for a payday within 10 days after the  payday in a prescribed non-electronic form. For these purposes, an employer may choose to treat the payday as the day on which a PAYE income payment is made, or: ▪ for an amount paid from the 1st to the 15th day of a month, the 15th of the month ▪ for an amount paid from the 16th to the last day of a month, the last day of the month. Thus, an employer can choose whether to deliver the information on a payday basis or on a twice-monthly basis. If an employer chooses to deliver the employment income information on a twice-monthly basis, they must deliver the information for all payments made during the relevant period. The threshold for this group may be set by Order in Council after appropriate consultation in the future. Example 1: Leonie and her husband farm in partnership and employ one full time employee who they pay on a weekly basis and at certain times of year they employ casual agricultural employees. They withheld less than $50,000 of PAYE and ESCT in the previous year and they have chosen to continue to file their employment income information on paper which places them in the “non-electronic group of employers”. Leonie has chosen to file their employment income information twice a month. When their only employee is their full timer the return identifies what was paid and withheld for each weekly payday within the half monthly period. When they employ casual staff, the half monthly return also includes the details for each payment made to casual workers. Their employment income information is due ten working days after the 15th of the month and 10 working days after month end. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 9.  For a new employer to be within the non-electronic group, the total accumulated amounts of tax for the current tax year must be below the threshold. If the accumulated amount reaches the threshold amount during the tax year, the employer is included in the new group for whatever remains of the six-month period from the date the  employer starts employing employees. Following that period, the employer is in the online group. An employer is also included in the non-electronic group if the Commissioner exempts the employer from the online group requirements because it is reasonable in the circumstances, taking into account: ▪ the nature and availability of digital services to the employer, including the reliability of those services for the employer’s purposes ▪ the capability of the employer relating to the use of computers, and ▪ the costs the employer would incur in complying with the requirements if those costs would be unreasonable in the circumstances. The Commissioner has to provide a statement of reasons for the exemption. Generally, the exemption remains valid until the Commissioner notifies the employer that it is to be cancelled, in which case it expires six months after the date given in the notice. However, the Commissioner can set a time limit on the exemption when it is made. Operational statement OS 19/01 Operational statement, OS 19/01 “Exemption from electronic filing” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 2, March 2019 at 3), discusses the criteria for a person to be granted an exemption from filing electronically. The Commissioner will take into account the availability of connection to the internet and type of connection, and accepts that a person will need at least a broadband internet connection. The reliability of the connection will also be considered and the statement states that an unreliable internet connection will be a significant factor in granting an exemption. The Commissioner will consider whether the person has the necessary computer skills to be able to use the digital technology and, if not, whether they have an employee, or can engage the services of someone, who is able to  use the technology. Whether the person has some disability that affects their ability to use digital services will also be relevant. If a person uses a computer with an internet connection in their business or as part of their everyday affairs, the Commissioner considers it reasonable to expect they will have little difficulty in sending the necessary returns/information electronically. The question of costs will be considered by determining what is unreasonable in the circumstances of the particular person. As most employers would use a computer in their business, the Commissioner considers there will generally be no material compliance costs for most employers. New group An employer is included in the new group if the employer becomes an employer in a tax year. The new-employer period is the six-month period that starts on the date in the tax year on which the employer starts employing employees (rather than the date they commence business, as under the previous rules). An employer in the new group may choose to deliver their employment income information for a payday in the new-employer period within 10 days after the payday in a nonelectronic format prescribed by the Commissioner. If an employer in the new group satisfies the requirements of the non-electronic group, they can also choose to deliver the employment income information on a payday basis or on a twice-monthly basis, as set out above. If an employer in the new group chooses to deliver their employment income information electronically, the employer will be immediately included in the online group. Example 2: Mel and Sefina have established a company and bought an existing business which employs 12 full time staff. Rather than take over the antiquated business systems which the previous owner used they intend to use a modern business software package that will look after invoicing and accounting as well as payroll. They know there are packages that can be used to meet their obligations for GST, provisional tax and employment income information. At the time they take the business over they have not chosen their new software system and know that, regardless of how much PAYE and ESCT they withhold, they  have a six-month period during which they can file their employment income information on paper. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 11.  Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 8 contains a graphic representation of the employer groups. Special payments Section 23J deals with certain special payments where the requirement to report them on a payday basis could increase compliance costs for employers. The identified payments and the delivery requirements are as follows: ▪ Schedular payments Employers have the option to deliver their employment income information on a payday basis, or twice-monthly, where payments made from the 1st to the 15th of the month must be reported, at the latest, as if the payment was made on the 15th, and payments made from the 16th to month end must be reported, at the latest, as if they were made at month end. The due dates for reporting will then depend on the employer group relevant for that employer, ie either two or ten working days. Example 3: Sacha and his wife farm in partnership. In addition to employing two staff who are paid fortnightly, they occasionally employ contractors who are paid schedular payments. They pay contractors at the end of their period of engagement. They do the payroll manually but the partnership files electronically, using the onscreen form, and is in the online group. If there is a regular payday between the date of the schedular payment and the end of the half monthly period for schedular payments Sacha reports the schedular payment at the same time as the next report for his employees. If the schedular payment falls after the last regular payday in the half month Sacha knows he could wait until the end of the half monthly period, but he generally files the information relating to the schedular payment on a payday basis, at the same time he calculates the payment. If he chose he could however wait until the end of the half monthly period to electronically file the information. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 12.  ▪ Shadow payroll payments These are payments paid by a non-resident employer to a person who undertakes employment services in New Zealand but who remains on the employer’s payroll system in a country or territory outside New Zealand. The non-resident employer has 20 days after payment before the requirement to deliver the employee income information arises. The employer may treat that 20th day as the payday and report on a payday basis, or provide their information twice-monthly, as for schedular payments, where the 20th day after payment is treated as the date payment is made. For these purposes the 20th day is not calculated on a working day basis but in actual days. ▪ Out-of-cycle payments These are payments the employer makes outside the regular payment cycle for the employee’s employment income. Employers can report these payments on a payday basis or with the employment income information for the next regular payment of salary or wages, except where the delay would carry the reporting over the end of a PAYE payment period and mean that, for reconciliation purposes, the information would appear to be reported as if the payment related to a later period. In this case, the employer has to report the out-of-cycle payment as if it was made on a date not later than the end date of the payment period. Note that Inland Revenue (IR) has indicated that the need for this exception relating to out-of-cycle payments will be reviewed after IR has completed the transfer of PAYE from its old to its new computer systems after 2020. Exceptions Despite the delivery requirements of the various groups and special payments, an employer can nevertheless deliver their information at any time before the dates set out above.  An employer can also ask the Commissioner for approval to deliver the information in another way. The Commissioner can give consent with terms and conditions, vary the terms and conditions, and cancel the consent. Payday Payday is defined as the day on which an employer makes a PAYE income payment to an employee. For employers instructing a bank to transfer funds to an employee, the payday is the date the employer has instructed the bank to make the funds available. The early transfer of the funds, for example on the preceding evening, does not change the payday. Payroll software Payroll software is defined as a commercially available payroll system or service, or another bespoke equivalent, that enables the calculation of amounts of salary or wages and amounts that are required to be withheld under the PAYE rules. The Commissioner can set specifications for payroll software from time to time. Requirements for employees providing information Where an employee is required to provide the employment income information under s RD 21(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act 2007 because tax was not withheld when the PAYE income payment was paid, the employee has to deliver the information in the prescribed format within 10 working days after the end of the month in which the payment is made. New and departing employees An employer can provide early advice to IR of a new or departing employee. Once IR’s business transformation is complete, sending employee details before a new employee is first paid is intended to enable IR to automatically check the IRD number and proposed tax code and communicate back in near real-time if changes are necessary or if there are other deductions, such as for child support, to be made. Near real-time checking of employee details before the employee is first paid will minimise the need to subsequently correct errors such as tax codes and deductions. While IR will encourage  employers to provide new employee information before the employee is first paid this will not be a requirement. The information has to be supplied by the date the employer is required to deliver employment information for the employee for the first payday, for a new employee, or the last payday, for a departing employee (as per the discussion above). For a new employee, the information requirements are those set out in sch 4, table 2, and for a departing employee, sch 4, table 3. In addition to the information required to identify the employer (name, contact address and tax file number), the following information has to be supplied for a new employee: ▪ name ▪ contact address ▪ date of birth, if supplied to employer ▪ commencement date of employment ▪ tax file number, if supplied to employer ▪ tax code, as supplied by employee ▪ KiwiSaver status under s 22 of the KiwiSaver Act 2006. This information is included on form IR 346K, “New employee and KiwiSaver details”. For departing employees, in addition to the employer identification information, the following information has to be supplied: ▪ name ▪ date of cessation of employment ▪ tax file number, if supplied to employer.  If any of the above information is already included in the employment income information provided, there is no need to repeat the information and only the additional information is required. A new employee, or an employee opting in, must advise the employer of the employee’s KiwiSaver status, including whether they are a member or choose to opt in, their deduction rate, whether they are on a contributions holiday, or of a desired change in status (see ¶29-215). Ceasing to employ When an employer stops employing employees, and the cessation is intended to be permanent, the employer is required to notify the Commissioner that employment has ended within 30 working days after the date on which they stop employing employees. Correction of errors Payday reporting of employment income information shortens the turnaround time and reduces the time available to employers to correct employment income information before it is sent to IR. In this context, therefore, the process for error correction and adjustment must have low compliance and administrative costs and must provide materially accurate employee information. The manner in which PAYE and related errors can be corrected is set out in the Tax Administration (Correction of Errors in Employment Income Information) Regulations 2019. The regulations apply to the following types of errors: ▪ payroll overpayment errors that arise when an employee is overpaid and correcting the overpayment requires consequential change to the amounts withheld for PAYE and related deductions, such as KiwiSaver and ESCT ▪ interpretation errors that arise when the employee receives the correct pay but an incorrect tax treatment is applied, and ▪ reporting errors that arise when the employee was paid and taxed correctly but reporting to IR does not accurately reflect  what was paid or withheld. However, the regulations do not generally apply to payroll corrections for underpayments or where an error is the result of an incorrect tax code being provided by an employee. Broadly speaking, once the type of error has been established, the relevant regulation provides for options for correction. The two main options are: ▪ same payday correction by notifying the Commissioner in accordance with s 14C, or ▪ later payday correction, ie correction in the employer’s employment income information for a later payday. An employer must correct an error as soon as is reasonably practicable after the employer becomes aware of it. Certain restrictions apply to the correction of errors in later paydays. Late filing penalty The late filing penalty is not imposed for a first instance of late filing of employment income information in a 12-month period. After an initial failure to file employment income information on time, the Commissioner has to notify the employer that a late filing penalty will be payable for a further failure. After a further failure to file within 12 months of the first, the Commissioner has to notify the employer that the penalty is payable. The key date for determining whether there is a penalty is the month in which the information is due, not the month in which the payday fell. Example 4: Matias and Carrie run a business that withholds more than $50,000 of PAYE and ESCT a year so they are in the online group. Matias manages the payroll which runs every week but he does not always meet his filing obligations with Inland Revenue. In February Matias missed two due dates for filing employment income information. Because it was not the first time in a twelve-month period, a penalty of $250 was imposed. Three months later Matias again missed a filing obligation, in respect of one payday return during the month, and was again penalised $250.  Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 18.  The maximum penalty able to be imposed for a failure to file employment income information on time is $250 a month, regardless of the number of failures to file on time in that month. The Commissioner also has a discretion not to impose the penalty, provided she considers it necessary because of resource constraints during the period of co-existence of the two IR software platforms and the taxpayer’s non-compliance is not serious or unreasonable. Payment of a late filing penalty is 30 days after the end of the month in which the employer is required to deliver the information. Standard practice statement SPS 19/04 Standard practice statement, SPS 19/04, “Late filing penalties” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 44), sets out the Commissioner’s practice for imposing late filing penalties under ss 139A and 139AAA of the TAA (see ¶14-040). The statement confirms that while employers are getting used to the new payday system, the Commissioner will take a three-stage approach to the application of any late filing penalties. The first time an employer fails to file employment income information by the due date, the Commissioner may initially look to educate and assist employers to comply with this requirement. Future defaults may result in the issue of a warning notice to the employer advising a late filing penalty will not be imposed this time, but in future if the information is not filed on time a late filing penalty of $250 will be imposed. The penalty will then be imposed if a further default occurs within 12 months of the warning notice being issued. If, following the warning notice, the employer files all employment income information on time for 12 months and then defaults, a further warning notice will be issued. The customer has a “clean sheet” and the process restarts. Note that this three-stage approach, involving the first education step, is intended to apply only while employers get used to their new payday filing obligations. In time it is intended that IR will revert to  using a two-stage approach, involving a warning letter, and then imposing a late filing penalty if a further default occurs within 12 months. IR has stated that taxpayers will be advised before any change to the two-stage approach is implemented. Setting electronic and non-electronic filing requirements The Commissioner is required to prescribe both electronic and nonelectronic forms and means of delivery for employment income information. These requirements are intended to ensure that: ▪ employment income information can be automatically read and processed by IR ▪ external parties, such as those using payroll software that communicates with IR, can do so securely, and ▪ customers using such software are able to have their identity verified. To enable processing of a payment, the Commissioner can notify employers that certain items of employment income information must accompany the payment. Variation of requirements The Commissioner has the power to vary the requirements in the new subpart and sch 4 for an employer or a class of employers. Law: IT07 ss RD 4, RD 22; TAA subpart 3C, 139A, 139AA, sch 4  ¶3-024 Employers and student loans It is the employee’s responsibility to notify the employer that he or she should have student loan repayments made from salary or wages. See ¶8-040. The amount deducted is 12¢ in the dollar on all income over $20,020 pa ($20,280 pa from 1 April 2021) — see also ¶8-040. For the correct employee tax code, see ¶3-030. In some cases, a tailored tax code may be applied for. See ¶3-034.  Deductions must be made from extra pays, including lump sum payments and annual bonuses to employees. Note that legislation was enacted to provide that employers also had to deduct student loan repayments from schedular payments, election-day income and casual agricultural income paid to employees. However, this legislation was repealed before it ever came into effect, as it was thought the compliance costs would be too high. See ¶8-055 for further detail. Law: SLSA 2011 ss 33–40  ¶3-025 Employers and child support An employer may be instructed by Inland Revenue (IR) to deduct a child support payment from the salary or wages of an employee and pay the deducted amount to IR. Child support has priority over all other deductions from an employee’s pay except for PAYE. For commentary on employers’ responsibilities for child support, see ¶12-040–¶12-060. Law: CHS Pt 10  ¶3-030 Tax codes For the purposes of the PAYE rules, a “tax code” is: ▪ the applicable code set out in sch 5, pt A, chosen by the employee and notified to their employer ▪ a tailored tax code provided by the Commissioner (see ¶3-034) ▪ a tax code for a private domestic worker (see ¶3-306) ▪ a tax code for a non-resident seasonal worker for the first month of employment in New Zealand (see ¶3-193) ▪ a non-notified tax code.  A tax code does not apply to a schedular payment (see ¶3-044) or an extra pay (see ¶3-221). New employees should fill out a tax code declaration form (IR 330) provided by the employer. The flowchart in IR 330 can be used to determine the correct tax code. The employer does not send the IR 330 form to Inland Revenue — it is kept with the employer’s business records for a minimum of seven years after the last salary or wages payment is made to the employee. The tax code chosen by the employee determines how much tax will be taken from his or her earnings and also alerts employers to any deductions to be made from the employee’s PAYE income payments, such as child support or student loan payments. The code also takes into account any tax credits that an employee might be entitled to when an end-of-year assessment is made. Non-notified tax code An employee (other than an employee who has applied for a tailored tax code or for a code as a private domestic worker) will have a nonnotified tax code if: ▪ the employee has not notified their employer of their name, tax file number and tax code ▪ the Commissioner has not provided the employer with a tax code or change in tax code because an incorrect tax code has been used, and ▪ the employee is not a non-resident seasonal worker during their first month of employment. If an employee’s tax code is a non-notified tax code, the rate of tax is 45¢ in the dollar (excluding earners’ levies). Changes to tax codes An employee must inform their employer of a change in their tax code (unless the Commissioner has provided a code to the employer because an incorrect tax code has been used — see below). If an  employee finds it difficult or impractical to inform their employer of a change in their tax code, they may notify the Commissioner who must then notify the employer of the employee’s new tax code. The new tax code will apply to a PAYE income payment paid from: ▪ the first day of the pay period until the tax code ceases if: □ the employer has no earlier tax code for the employee, or □ the change is provided before the date the employer calculates their payroll for the period ▪ from the first day of the next pay period if the change is provided after the date the employer calculates their payroll for the period. Cessation of tax code If an employee ceases to be entitled to use a certain code, they must notify their employer within four days of becoming aware of their ineligibility, giving the reason that the code no longer applies and the date it ceased to apply. The same information must be provided to the Commissioner if the employee notifies the Commissioner that their entitlement has ceased. The employer must not apply that code to any PAYE income payment made to the employee after the date on which entitlement ceased, unless the payment is salary or wages for a current pay period. The employer is not required to change the amount of tax withheld if they have not received notice of the cessation of eligibility. Incorrect tax code If the Commissioner considers an employer or a PAYE intermediary has applied an incorrect tax code, the Commissioner may notify the employee and the employer, or PAYE intermediary, of the incorrect tax code and provide the employee’s correct tax code. An employer or a PAYE intermediary who receives such a notice has to apply the tax code specified by the Commissioner to PAYE income payments  made to the employee after the date of notification. However, the tax code does not apply if the employee notifies their employer that their circumstances have changed and, as a result, a different tax code should apply. Unsuitable tax code If the Commissioner considers a more suitable or more accurate tax code could be, or could have been, used, she may recommend a prospective change of code to the employee and, with the employee’s consent, notify the employer of the change in tax code. Law: TAA subpart 3D, sch 5  ¶3-034 Tailored tax codes In some cases, applying ordinary tax codes will result in either not enough or too much tax being deducted from employees’ salaries. This might result in a substantial end-of-year adjustment, which can be a troublesome administrative exercise for some employees. In such a case, an employee may request a tailored tax code from Inland Revenue (IR) or the Commissioner may recommend a tailored tax code for the employee. An application may be made online in myIR or to IR on form IR 23BS (November 2019). The certificate is only valid for one year. At the end of that period, the employee must either obtain a new tailored tax code certificate or complete a tax code declaration (IR 330). IR will automatically send a renewal form to reapply before 20 February each year. A tailored tax code certificate will instruct the employer to deduct PAYE at a particular rate. Employees who may benefit from a tailored tax code include: ▪ those who have two jobs and whose secondary employment tax rate is insufficient ▪ those who are beneficiaries or receive accident compensation and also work, or  ▪ those who are operating businesses at a loss that may be deducted from their employment income (although note that generally this no longer applies to residential rental losses, most of which are now ring fenced — see ¶7-365). See also IR 23G, “Do you need a tailored tax code or tailored tax rate?” (November 2019). The Commissioner may provide tailored tax code certificates directly to the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) to help people receiving New Zealand Superannuation or a veterans’ pension to meet their income tax obligations. Where a person applies for a tailored tax code certificate, the amount of any entitlements under the working for families provisions are not taken into account in determining that person’s estimated tax liability for the tax year. The Commissioner may withdraw the tailored tax code at any time by notifying the employer or employee and his decision to do so is not subject to judicial review. See C of IR v Lemmington Holdings Ltd (1982) 5 NZTC 61,268 (CA). If the employee is notified, they must then notify their employer that their entitlement to use the tax code has ended. Law: TAA s 24D, sch 5 pt B  ¶3-044 Schedular payments Schedular payments are a type of PAYE income payment and are dealt with in subpart RD of the Income Tax Act 2007 (ITA). These payments are subject to withholding at the rates specified in sch 4 of the ITA, rather than at the basic rates in sch 2. A schedular payment is generally applicable where the relationship of the parties is not strictly one of employer and employee. The types of payments to such non-employees (referred to here as contractors) that might be subject to withholding tax include the following:  ▪ commission paid to insurance agents or salespersons ▪ company directors’ fees ▪ payments for most forms of agricultural, horticultural and forestry work ▪ payments for mail delivery, transport of school children, milk delivery, refuse removal, caretaking, security duties, and street or road cleaning ▪ payments for non-residential cleaning, gardening, vermin or weed destruction ▪ payments to persons supervising examinations ▪ payments for the supply of labour to building projects ▪ payments to labour-only fishing boat operators ▪ certain payments made in the media production industry including media contribution fees ▪ payments to photographers, journalists, writers and artists ▪ fees for persons exhibiting or demonstrating goods ▪ payments for modelling ▪ payments to entertainers including non-musical entertainers ▪ payments to apprentice jockeys ▪ honoraria payments ▪ election officer remuneration ▪ payments made to people selling greenstone, eels, whitebait, and sphagnum moss  ▪ contract payments to non-resident contractors ▪ ACC personal service rehabilitation payments ▪ unrepaid PAYE income overpayments treated as schedular payments under s RD 8B(2)(c) ▪ payments under labour-hire arrangements, and ▪ voluntary schedular payments. A contractor who falls into one of these categories needs to complete an IR 330C, “Tax rate notification for contractors” (April 2019), and give it to the person paying him or her. Recipients of schedular payments use the tax code “WT”. The payer withholds tax from payments at the applicable rate unless an exemption applies. The applicable rate will be one of the following: ▪ elected rate ▪ special rate ▪ no-notification rate ▪ prescribed rate ▪ non-resident entertainer ▪ standard rate. The table below summarises the various rates and when to apply them.  Elected rate  Description  Rate  Chosen by the payee.  10%–100% (15%–100% for nonresidents and holders of temporary visas)  Special rate  Payee can request from Commissioner.  Only necessary if the payee wants a rate lower than 10% (or 15% as above)  No notification rate  When the payee does not provide name or IRD number to the payer.  20% for non-resident companies 45% for other contractors  Prescribed rate  Set by Cannot exceed 50% Commissioner when the payee has not met a liability under the Inland Revenue Acts.  Non-resident entertainer rate  This rate must be used by nonresident entertainers.  20%  Standard rate  The rate for the activity or arrangement set out in sch 4, which will apply if none of the rates set out above apply.  Vary between 10.5% and 33% depending on the type of activity or arrangement  Elected rate Contractors can elect their own withholding rate to better match their tax payments to their income, subject to a 10% minimum rate applying for residents and a 15% minimum rate for non-residents and contractors with temporary entry visas. If a contractor changes their rate twice in a 12-month period in relation to the same payer, they will require the consent of the payer to make any further changes.  Example 1:  On 3 March 2018 Caroline starts work as a building contractor for Small Builders Ltd. Payments from Small Builders to Caroline are subject to the schedular payment rules and Caroline initially selects a withholding rate of 15%. On 4 April 2018, Caroline wishes to change her withholding rate and notifies Small Builders that she wishes to have a withholding rate of 20% apply to her. Caroline does not require the consent of Small Builders to this change as she has only elected a withholding rate once within the last 12 months. However, if Caroline wishes to make any further changes to her withholding rate for payments made by Small Builders up till 3 March 2019, she will require the consent of Small Builders. On 5 August 2018, Caroline starts work for Large Builders Ltd. Caroline can elect a new withholding rate without the consent of Large Builders Ltd as she has not previously elected a withholding rate with Large Builders Ltd. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 50.  Special rate A contractor, other than a non-resident entertainer, wishing a rate lower than the minimum will have to apply for a special rate of tax. The Commissioner may cancel their entitlement to the special tax rate at any time by giving notice of the cancellation. No-notification rate When a contractor has not provided their name and tax file number to the payer, the withholding rate is a flat rate of 45%. This applies to all contractors other than corporate non-resident contractors, who have a 20% no-notification rate. Prescribed rate When the contractor has not met a liability under an Inland Revenue Act, the Commissioner can require the standard schedular payment  deductions and also additional deductions, which are used to meet the contractor’s tax debts or other liabilities. Notice must be given to the payer and to the contractor (unless the Commissioner, after making reasonable inquiries, does not have a valid address for the latter). The Commissioner can prescribe a rate under s 24F(4) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), which adjusts the standard schedular withholding rate, to ensure a taxpayer’s ongoing compliance with their obligations. The Commissioner can also prescribe a percentage of the schedular payments that the payer must deduct and pay to the Commissioner. The prescribed tax rate and percentage must not total more than 50%. The Commissioner may rescind a prescribed rate at any time. On request by the contractor, the Commissioner is required to rescind a prescribed rate if the Commissioner is satisfied that all liabilities under the Inland Revenue Acts have been met and is reasonably satisfied that they will be met in the future. The Commissioner must also rescind the prescribed percentage if the Commissioner is satisfied the contractor has paid all tax due and payable. The additional deductions will generally be required to be recorded on a separate line in the employment information and under a different tax code. The Commissioner has stated that she does not intend to use this prescribed rate notice to require additional deductions to meet a contractor’s other tax debts until schedular payments are administered in IR’s new computer system (START). Example 2: Ben is a building contractor. He earns $120,000 each year from his building contracts with several major building companies. Ben elects a withholding rate of 10% and $12,000 is withheld from him for the year. Ben predominantly provides labour services and has minimal deductions. His end-ofyear tax liability is $30,000 and so Ben has a terminal tax bill of $18,000. Ben does not pay his terminal tax bill and so ends up with a tax debt. The Commissioner prescribes a new rate of withholding to Ben and his payers. This new rate is:  ▪ 25% under the standard schedular payment code (WT). Ben receives PAYE credits for these amounts and these amounts are intended to ensure that Ben does not have an end-of-year income tax liability and further tax bills, and ▪ an additional 15% under a new tax code and recorded on a new line in the employment income information. Amounts withheld under this code are used to pay Ben’s tax debt for the previous year. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 51.  Non-resident entertainers Non-resident entertainers have a flat withholding rate of 20% apply to them and this is treated as a final tax. Non-resident entertainers are not able to elect their own rate or obtain a special tax rate and the no-notification rate does not apply to them. Standard rate If a contractor has not elected a rate or received a special rate, the standard rate — as listed in sch 4 — applies. See ¶50-080 for a complete list of the standard schedular rates. It is important to note that in the case of schedular payments to non-resident contractors the Commissioner’s “preferred interpretation is that the non-resident contractor rate is to be applied only when there is no other rate that could apply”. See Interpretation Statement IS 10/04, “Non-resident contractor schedular payments”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 30. Exclusions from schedular payments Certain payments are declared not to be schedular payments. These payments are as follows: ▪ Any salary, wages or extra pay (for which tax deductions would be made at PAYE rates). ▪ Any payment for services provided by a public, local or Māori Authority or a company, other than a non-resident entertainer, a non-resident contractor, a company in relation to a payment under a labour-hire arrangement or a voluntary schedular payment, or a specified agricultural, horticultural, or viticultural  company. (These bodies, if they are taxpayers, pay provisional tax and do not come within the tax deduction system.) ▪ An exempt payment referred to in s 24H and sch 5, pt C, cl 6 of the TAA. ▪ Payments for services rendered by non-resident contractors who have full relief from tax under a double tax agreement who are present in New Zealand for 92 days or less in any 12-month period. See ¶26-480. ▪ A contract payment for a contract activity or service of a nonresident contractor when the total amount paid for these activities is $15,000 or less in a 12-month period. Note that payments to companies are generally not classified as schedular payments, with the few exceptions noted above. The exclusion for a payment of salary or wages means that such payments are subject to the PAYE rules even though the payment may also be one of the kind listed in sch 4. For example, commission paid to an employed sales representative is subject to PAYE withholding and not treated as a schedular payment: Case B30 (1976) 2 NZTC 60,254 and Challenge Realty Ltd v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,212 (CA). Exempt payments Under s RD 8 of the ITA and s 24H and sch 5, pt C, cl 6 of the TAA the Commissioner may notify a contractor that they are entitled to receive payment in full, ie without any tax being deducted. Payments to a non-resident entertainer or payments under a labourhire arrangement (see below) cannot be exempt payments. The Commissioner has the right to revoke the exemption at any time. The Commissioner must notify the contractor of the revocation. GST and schedular payments A contractor who is GST-registered will charge GST on goods and services supplied. This means the contractor’s gross earnings will  increase by the GST charged. An employer must withhold tax from the GST-exclusive amount of a schedular payment. Example 3: Boris hands you a GST-tax invoice for his cleaning services showing: $ Cost of labour Plus GST (15% of $1,000)  1,000 150 1,150  Calculate withholding tax on GST-exclusive amount GST-exclusive amount  1,000  Less tax (20% of $1,000)  200 800  Plus GST from tax invoice  150  Net payment  950  The tax rate for commercial cleaning contract services is 20%. You would deduct 20% tax from $1,000 (ie $200) and pay Boris the net amount of $950 (ie $1,150 less $200). The $1,000 is included as the gross payment on the employment information and $200 at box 3 (IR 348).  Directors’ fees For payments of directors’ fees, see ¶3-202. Independent contractors’ deductions for expenses The expenditure incurred in deriving a schedular payment is generally allowed as a deduction. For example, if a person worked from home, it is possible for that person to deduct a proportionate part (usually on a percentage of floor area) of any mortgage interest, insurance, power, rates, depreciation, etc, incurred. The Commissioner may make determinations as to the proportion of expenditure incurred in deriving a particular schedular payment or a class of schedular payments. See ¶3-457.  Non-resident contractors For payments made to non-resident contractors, see ¶3-286. Duty of person paying schedular payment A person who pays schedular payments is an employer in terms of subpart RD and is required to comply with the employer’s duties. The person is not required to deduct ACC earners’ levy or, if applicable, student loan repayments from schedular payments. Labour-hire firm contractors For payments made by labour-hire firms to their contractors, see ¶3275. Voluntary withholding agreements Contractors not covered by the schedular payment rules can opt into voluntary withholding agreements. These require the payer to agree to withhold and for this to be recorded in a document. The standard rate of tax is 20%. See sch 4 pt W. This can apply to payments made to companies, so long as the parties have entered an agreement for withholding to apply. A document can be a memorandum, email, letter or formal contract between the parties so long as there is sufficient written evidence that there has been a required agreement between the parties (which can be either electronic or in hardcopy). Payments covered by voluntary withholding agreements are excluded from the definition of “employer and employee” for the purpose of the FBT rules. This means that fringe benefit tax does not apply when fringe benefits are provided to contractors under voluntary withholding agreements. Law: IT07 ss RD 8, RD 10(3), RD 10B, sch 4; TAA ss 24F–24I, sch 5 pt C  ¶3-050 Court awards for lost wages A court or authority may require an employer to make an award for lost wages or other remuneration under s 123 or 128 of the  Employment Relations Act 2000. A court or authority will make such an award when an employee has lost wages or other remuneration as a result of an action by the employer that has been the subject of a personal grievance by the employee against the employer (eg unjustifiable dismissal or other unjustifiable action by the employer). The Commissioner has issued public binding ruling BR Pub 06/06 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 7, August 2006 at 17) on Employment Court or Employment Relations Authority awards for lost wages or other remuneration. The ruling states that the payment of an award for lost wages or other remuneration is employment income under s CE 1. The payment is an extra pay and a PAYE income payment and the employer is liable to make a tax deduction from it under s RA 5 and account for the deduction to Inland Revenue (IR) in the normal way. See ¶3-221. This also applies even if the employment relationship has ended. If an employer fails to make the required tax deductions from a payment, the employee is liable, under s RD 4(2), to pay an amount equal to those tax deductions to the Commissioner (and is also required to furnish to the Commissioner an employment information form showing details of the payment). See ¶3-124. Compensation payments that are awarded by a court for humiliation, loss of dignity or injury to feelings under s 123(1)(c)(i) of the Employment Relations Act are not employment income. See ¶3-468. Award of net sum by court or authority In some cases, a court or an authority may make an award for lost wages or other remuneration net of tax, ie the sum that the employee would have received as remuneration after the deduction of tax. Because the award is a PAYE income payment, in such cases, the employer would normally gross up the award to take account of the PAYE and the ACC earners’ levy. The employer would then pay the tax on the gross amount to IR and pay the net award to the employee.  ¶3-060 Accident compensation See ¶31-010–¶31-025 for a discussion of accident compensation and employers.  ¶3-096 Health and safety levy See ¶31-080 for a discussion of the health and safety levy.  ¶3-101 Employer’s superannuation contribution tax Employers are required to contribute to employees’ savings in KiwiSaver schemes and complying superannuation funds. Employers or PAYE intermediaries making cash contributions to employee superannuation schemes must deduct employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) from those contributions. An “employer’s superannuation cash contribution” is a monetary contribution paid by an employer to either a superannuation fund or, under the KiwiSaver Act 2006, to Inland Revenue (IR) for subsequent payment to a superannuation fund. The ESCT is paid to IR along with PAYE deductions. The compulsory employer contribution rate is 3% of the employee’s gross salary or wages. All employer contributions are subject to ESCT at progressive rates equivalent to the employee’s marginal tax rates. Alternatively, employees, with the consent of the employer, can elect to have some or all of their employer’s superannuation cash contributions treated as salary or wages under the PAYE rules. For a further discussion of ESCT see ¶29-420–¶29-425. The deductibility of superannuation contributions is governed by ss DC 7, EF 2 and EJ 21. An employer is allowed a deduction for a superannuation contribution to an employee’s superannuation scheme. The employer may choose to allocate the deduction to either:  ▪ the income year for which the contribution was required to be made to the superannuation scheme, or ▪ the income year for which the amount of the contribution was calculated taking into account the earnings paid to employees who were members of the scheme during the income year, provided the employer makes the contribution within 63 days of the end of the income year. Under s EF 2, an amount of ESCT may only be deducted in the income year in which the employer’s superannuation contribution (to which the tax relates) was made. This is irrespective of whether the tax actually becomes due and payable in the income year. See ¶10292 and ¶29-410. Law: IT07 ss RA 5(1)(c), RD 64, RD 65, RD 68  ¶3-110 Employer ceasing business or deceased If an employer sells, or ceases to be in, a business and permanently ceases to employ, the employer must notify Inland Revenue within 30 working days of the date they cease to employ staff. This can be done by phone, through myIR or by completing an IR 315 Business cessation form. The employer will need to file a final employment information form (IR 348) and record a finish date for each employee and the date the employer ceased employing. If a business is a company and the shareholders sell their shares as a way of disposing of the business, the company continues to be an employer and is not regarded as ceasing to be in business. Employer deceased When an employer dies, the executor/administrator is liable to fulfil any PAYE requirements of the deceased employer. Inland Revenue must be notified that the employer has ceased employing within 30 working days of the date of death. The estate will then assume the obligations of an employer from the date of death. Law: IT07 s RD 2(3); TAA s 23M  ¶3-124 Payments of deductions by employees Where an employer does not make a deduction of tax from a PAYE income payment, the employee must pay to Inland Revenue (IR) an amount equal to the tax deduction that should have been made by the 20th day of the month following the payment of the PAYE income payment. In addition, the employee must provide the corresponding employment income information to IR within 10 working days after the end of the month in which the payment is made. This situation can occur for persons: ▪ who receive payments for work as a private domestic worker, where the employer is not liable to make deductions (see ¶3303 and ¶3-306) ▪ who receive pensions from overseas where the payer, not being a New Zealand resident, is outside the jurisdiction of the Act and does not make tax deductions, or ▪ who receive salary or wages from an overseas employer who is outside the jurisdiction. Where the PAYE income payment is less than the required tax deduction, the employee is required to pay to the employer the amount by which the required tax deduction exceeds the amount of the PAYE income payment that is available in money. That is deemed to be a tax deduction made by the employer, who then accounts to IR in the normal way. This situation may occur where, for example, the employee has received a large non-cash allowance in the pay period that is to be added to his or her cash receipts for the purpose of calculating the amount of tax deductions to be made. Where the employee does not pay the required amount to the employer, the employee should treat whatever money is available in the PAYE income payment as the tax deduction made, and account for them to IR, explaining the reason for, and the amount of, the deficiency. The employee is then personally liable to account to IR for the deficiency.  The Commissioner is also entitled to take action to recover tax from an employer or an employee where there has been default by the employer in making a tax deduction. Law: IT07 ss RA 8, RA 10, RD 21; TAA ss 23I, 168  ¶3-125 Recovery of unpaid tax deductions Deductions of tax and earner-related levies by employers or PAYE intermediaries are deemed to be held in trust for the Crown. The deductions never legally belong to the employer. In the event that the employer becomes bankrupt or is liquidated the amounts deducted do not form part of the assets available for distribution to creditors. Where the employer is bankrupted, liquidated or placed in receivership and has failed to account for a tax deduction under the PAYE rules s 167(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 sets out the priority of the unpaid amounts. In the situation where an employer or PAYE intermediary fails to make a deduction of tax from a PAYE income payment, the amount that should have been deducted constitutes a debt payable to the Commissioner due and payable on the date the deduction should have been paid under s RD 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Under s 168 the Commissioner is entitled to recover the outstanding amount from the employer or employee or partly from each. In Case P44 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,308, the Taxation Review Authority noted that the Commissioner is entitled to recover PAYE tax deductions from either an employer or an employee if the employer has failed to deduct the tax. The authority held, however, that an employee becomes liable for PAYE only when the employer has failed to make the PAYE deductions at the time the wages are paid. An employee is not liable when the employer has simply failed to pass those deductions on to Inland Revenue (IR). The Commissioner is not entitled to seek payment of PAYE deductions from an employee if it is reasonable for the employee to assume that the employer has made the appropriate PAYE tax deductions before payment of wages.  Example: After examining a taxpayer’s employer’s records, the Commissioner assessed the taxpayer for tax on additional income not returned by the taxpayer. The Commissioner considered that the taxpayer knew that her employer had not made PAYE deductions from her wages. The Taxation Review Authority held that an employee’s duties to make a tax deduction arose only when the deduction had not been made by the employer. The authority considered that the taxpayer was not liable for payment of the tax, because it was probable that the employer had made the appropriate tax deductions. See Case N45 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,375.  It should be noted that the legislation makes no mention of an employee’s knowledge in such circumstances and the authority hinted, in Case P44 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,308, that an employee’s belief or knowledge may not be relevant. Under s 169, if an employer fails wholly or in part to deduct an amount of tax or combined tax and earner-related payment in accordance with the PAYE rules or fails to remit a deduction to IR, the unpaid amount is a charge on all the real and personal property of the employer. Failure by PAYE intermediary The failure by a PAYE intermediary to make any required tax deduction shall be: ▪ a debt payable by the PAYE intermediary to the Commissioner, and ▪ a charge over the PAYE intermediary’s property which may be registered by the Commissioner. The Crown will also rank as preferential creditor if the PAYE intermediary goes bankrupt or (in the case of a company) goes into liquidation or receivership. This applies only if the employer has satisfied the obligations to the PAYE intermediary for the salary or wages of the employer’s employees (see ¶3-479), and the employer has provided the information requested by the PAYE intermediary within the time agreed between them.  Law: TAA ss 167, 168, 169  ¶3-131 Records to be kept Employers must keep PAYE records, as well as the records required under the Child Support Act 1991, the KiwiSaver Act 2006 and the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011. Table 1 of sch 3 to the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) provides that employers have to keep records of the amounts of: ▪ PAYE income payments ▪ tax for PAYE income payments ▪ advance pays ▪ payroll donations ▪ employer’s superannuation contribution ▪ benefits under an employee share scheme ▪ personal service rehabilitation payments ▪ tax credits for payroll donations ▪ child support deductions ▪ student loan deductions ▪ employer KiwiSaver contributions, and ▪ employee KiwiSaver contribution deductions. In addition, they have to keep the name, tax file number, tax code, date of birth and contact addresses of every person who derives or receives such amounts. Also, if the employer is in an arrangement with a PAYE intermediary:  ▪ the PAYE intermediary is required to keep proper records of its actions as a PAYE intermediary, and ▪ the employer must keep proper records of the employer’s payments to the PAYE intermediary of salary or wages in respect of its employees. Every employer or PAYE intermediary must take all reasonable precautions for the safe custody of all the records required to be kept, including pay sheets, receipts for PAYE income payments, withholding certificates, tax code notifications, tax code certificates and certificates of entitlement. All records must be kept for a minimum of seven years after the payments to which they relate were made. The exception to this is if: ▪ the Commissioner has notified the employer or PAYE intermediary that retention is not required, or ▪ the employer or PAYE intermediary has delivered the records to the Commissioner as required by the TAA or the Income Tax Act 2007. Law: IT07 s RP 8; TAA s 22AA, sch 3  ¶3-171 PAYE offences PAYE offences are contained in Pt 9 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The offences and penalties are as follows: ▪ a shortfall penalty of a maximum of 150% of the resulting shortfall where the taxpayer, in taking a tax position, knowingly applies or permits the application of a deduction or withholding of tax for a purpose other than payment to the Commissioner, or knowingly fails to make a deduction, withholding of tax, or transfer of payroll donations (s 141E). The first of these will not apply if the employers’ withholding payment penalty for unpaid amounts on the provision of employment income information applies (s 141ED). See ¶14-121 and ¶14-124.  ▪ shortfall penalty imposed on an officer of a company (s 141F). See ¶14-122. ▪ offence for failure to provide information (s 143(1)(b)). See ¶14240. ▪ offence for knowingly failing to provide information, knowingly applying or permitting the application of a deduction or withholding of tax for a purpose other than payment to the Commissioner, or knowingly not making a deduction or withholding of tax (s 143A). See ¶14-250, and ▪ offence for knowingly failing to provide information, knowingly providing false or misleading information, or knowingly failing to make a tax deduction with the intention of evading the payment of tax or obtaining a refund or payment of tax (s 143B). See ¶14-260. Law: TAA ss 141E, 141F, 143, 143A, 143B, 167, 168, 169  PARTICULAR CLASSES OF EARNINGS AND EARNERS ¶3-180 ACC personal service rehabilitation payments ACC has the responsibility for withholding tax from personal service rehabilitation payments passed on by ACC claimants to independent providers. Personal service rehabilitation payments are amounts paid for the benefit of a person under ss 81(3), 372 or 374 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 by the ACC or an employer that is an accredited employer as defined in s 181 of that Act for attendant care, home help, training for independence and escorted travel. Attendant care means personal care and assistance with the cognitive tasks of daily living. Personal service rehabilitation payments come within the definition of schedular payments. The standard rate of tax for personal service  rehabilitation payments is 10.5%. See further ¶5-303 and ¶10-112. Law: IT07 ss RD 3(1)(b)(iii), YA 1, sch 4 pt I  ¶3-185 Insurance policies Before 30 March 2017, expenditure on account of an employee specifically included the premium paid on a life insurance policy taken out on the life of an employee, his or her spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner or the employee’s child. This treatment was subject to a number of exceptions. Life and health insurance policies falling within these exceptions could attract a fringe benefit tax liability. With effect from 30 March 2017, the fringe benefit tax treatment of life insurance premiums has been rationalised to ensure that all life insurance premiums for life insurance policies taken out by an employer on employees’ lives (or certain family members) are treated as specified insurance premiums and classified as a fringe benefit (see ¶21-540). Premiums paid by an employer on income protection insurance policies taken out for the benefit of an employee are specifically excluded from the definition of “expenditure on account of an employee” (see s CE 5(3)(j)) and therefore not subject to PAYE. Under s CE 11 any amounts derived under an income protection insurance policy where the person’s employer was liable to pay or contribute to the policy’s premium are deemed to be income to the person. Therefore, such premiums are not subject to the FBT rules. Generally, where the employer has no beneficial interest and the employee has an indefeasible right to the proceeds, the premiums paid by the employer will be deductible. See ¶5-300 and ¶10-540. Questions We’ve Been Asked Term life insurance On 23 February 2018, Inland Revenue released two Questions we’ve been asked. QB 18/02, “Income tax — Insurance — Term life  insurance policy taken out by employee with employer paying the premiums on employee’s behalf”, concludes that the amount of the premiums in that scenario is deductible to the employer and treated as salary or wages and therefore subject to PAYE for the employee. Lump sums paid out under the policy will not be taxable income of the employee (or the employee’s estate). QB 18/03, “Income tax — Insurance — Term life insurance policy taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee”, concludes that the amount of the premiums in that scenario is deductible to the employer and subject to FBT. Lump sums paid out under the policy will not be taxable income of the employee (or the employee’s estate). They are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 24 and 26. The QWBAs replace the earlier QWBAs, QB 15/05 and QB 15/06. Personal sickness and accident insurance On 23 February 2018, the Commissioner released two Questions We’ve Been Asked. The first, QB 18/04, “Income tax — Insurance — Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employee with employer paying the premiums on employee’s behalf” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 28), concludes: ▪ The employer will generally be entitled to a deduction for the premiums paid. ▪ The amount of the premiums paid for income protection insurance will not be subject to PAYE. The amount of premiums paid for other personal sickness or accident insurance policies will be treated as salary or wages and, therefore, subject to PAYE. Fringe benefit tax will not apply because the policy belongs to the employee. ▪ Amounts paid out under income protection insurance policies will be income under s CE 11. Amounts paid out under other personal sickness or accident policies will be income only if they are income under ordinary concepts (s CA 1(2)). Amounts that are not income under ordinary concepts will not be subject to tax.  ▪ Amounts that are income under s CE 11 or CA 1(2) will be exempt income if they are payments made to a person because they (or another person) are incapacitated for work, and either: □ paid by a friendly society, or □ not calculated according to a loss of earnings. ▪ If the payment does not meet these criteria, it will be assessable income. QB 18/05, “Income tax — Insurance — Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 32), considers the income tax treatment of a personal sickness or accident insurance policy that is taken out by an employer where an employee (or their spouse, civil union or de facto partner, or child) is the beneficiary. With one exception, QB 18/05 reaches the same conclusions as QB 18/04. The exception relates to the treatment of the premiums. QB 18/05 concludes: ▪ The premiums paid will be subject to fringe benefit tax unless they are premiums paid for income protection insurance where: □ the employer has a liability to pay (or contribute to) the premiums, and □ a pay-out under the insurance policy would be assessable income of the employee. The QWBAs replace the earlier QWBAs, QB 15/09 and QB 15/10. Key-person or key-man insurance In June 2017, IR released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/06, “Income tax: Insurance — Key-person insurance policies” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 7, August 2017 at 3). The item deals only with key-person (also referred to as “key-man” or a type of “loss of profits”) policies. These policies are taken out for the purpose of replacing lost business profits as a result of something happening to a key person in the business. The item does not apply to a sole  trader taking out an insurance policy on themselves. However, if a sole trader or partnership or other entity is employing staff then the QWBA may apply, provided the insurance is to protect the business from the loss of the person in the capacity of employee. That is, the insurance must link to the person in their role as employee. Also the item does not cover situations where the employer makes a payment of all or part of the claim amounts to an employee or their estate. IR has indicated that these will be addressed later in separate QWBAs. The item also does not cover whole of life or endowment policies as IR understand that these types of policies are no longer commonly used in this context. The item considers what the income tax treatment of payments made or received under a term life or an illness/disability insurance policy is where: ▪ the policy holder and recipient of any claim amount received under the policy is a business that employs staff ▪ the premium amounts are paid by the business ▪ the insured person is an employee of the business (“the keyperson”), and ▪ the amount insured is an estimate of loss of business profits that would result from the death or incapacitation of the key person. This type of insurance policy is commonly referred to as a “keyperson insurance” policy and includes policies that cover total permanent disability, personal sickness and accident. The item concludes that a lump sum or a fixed periodic sum paid under the policy is taxable income of the employer under s CB 1 (business income) and that premium amounts paid for a key-person insurance policy are deductible under s DA 1. The QWBA covers key-person insurance policies to the extent that the sum insured is for an agreed sum based on estimated loss of business profits. Insurance policies can be taken out for reasons other than, or in addition to, this loss of business profits purpose (eg  loss of business profits, mortgage repayment protection, and collateral for capital funding). The item states that to the extent the insured amount is for replacement of capital, the premiums will not be deductible and correspondingly the claim amount portion that relates to the replacement of capital will not be taxable income. Where a policy is not solely to replace a loss of profits, apportionment of the premiums and claim amount may be required. Group insurance for term life or accident/medical cover In December 2017, Inland Revenue released a question we’ve been asked, QB 17/10, “Income tax and fringe benefit tax — Insurance — Group insurance policy taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 1, February 2018 at 19). The item applies to a group insurance policy for term life cover, accident/medical cover, or both that has all of the following features: ▪ the employer is the policy owner and pays the premium ▪ the insured persons are the employees and the employer holds the policy for the benefit of the employees ▪ the risk insured against is the death, permanent disablement, accident, disease or sickness of the employee(s) ▪ the claim amount will either be paid to the employer by the insurer on the happening of the relevant event (death or accident or medical event), and then passed on to the relevant employee (or their estate), or paid directly to the employee at the direction of the employer. The item concludes the premiums paid by the employer will be subject to fringe benefit tax and deductible, and that amounts paid out under the policy will not be income of the employer. Lump sums paid out on death under a term life insurance policy will not be taxable income of the employee (or employee’s estate), and amounts paid out (or that an employee is otherwise entitled to) under accident/medical cover policies will be income of the employee only if they are income under ordinary concepts. Amounts that are not  income under ordinary concepts will not be subject to tax. Amounts that are income under ordinary concepts may be exempt income under s CW 34 if they are paid to a person because they (or another person) are incapacitated for work and the payment is not calculated according to loss of earnings. See also ¶10-540 and ¶21-540. Law: IT07 ss CE 1(1)(b), CE 5, CE 11  ¶3-190 Casual agricultural employees Casual agricultural employees are subject to PAYE deductions at the flat rate of 17.5¢ in the dollar if they have filled in their tax code declaration form IR 330 (see ¶3-030) with the tax code “CAE”. ACC earners’ levy is also deducted at the same time. The term “casual agricultural employee” encompasses casual agricultural workers, shearers and shearing shed hands. A casual agricultural worker is defined as a person engaged on a day-to-day basis, for a period of no more than three months, as a casual seasonal worker. The person must be engaged for the exclusive purpose of doing seasonal agricultural, horticultural, orchard, tobacco farming, market gardening, or nursery work or other seasonal work that, in the opinion of the Commissioner, is work of a like nature. Note that agricultural contractors and shearing contractors are not employees subject to PAYE deductions. Withholding tax should be deducted from payments made to such contractors as prescribed in sch 4. See “Farming contract workers” at ¶3-191 and, in relation to shearing contractors, ¶3-351. Law: IT07 s YA 1, sch 2 pt A cl 7; TAA s 24C  ¶3-191 Farming contract workers Farming contract work includes a variety of general agricultural work. Workers who are contracted by a farmer to do any of the following kinds of work, which is related to land that is used, or intended to be  used, for farming or agriculture, are treated as rendering farming contract work: ▪ firewood cutting ▪ post or rail splitting ▪ cutting down trees incidental to firewood cutting, or post or rail splitting ▪ grass or grass seed cutting ▪ hedge cutting ▪ planting trees ▪ planting or cutting flax ▪ threshing, chaff cutting, hay making, hay baling ▪ harvesting or gathering crops. Payments made to farming contractors are schedular payments and the standard rate of tax to be deducted is 15¢ in the dollar as prescribed in sch 4 pt C (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Fruit pickers, packers and pruners For commentary on fruit pickers, packers or pruners see ¶3-225. Law: IT07 sch 4 pt C  ¶3-193 Non-resident seasonal workers A non-resident seasonal worker is a non-resident for whom certified immigration instructions allow them to be employed in New Zealand under: ▪ the recognised seasonal employer (RSE) instructions, or  ▪ the foreign crew of fishing vessels instructions. These persons must be non-residents who do not qualify as New Zealand tax residents, but who must pay tax on earnings derived in New Zealand. The special tax code for recognised non-resident seasonal workers is NSW and tax is deducted from their pay at a flat rate of 10.5%. Payments to these workers are also subject to the ACC earners levy. Non-resident seasonal workers are deemed to have a tax code of NSW for the first month of their employment in New Zealand. This means they are not subject to the non-notified tax code rate of 45% for at least the first month of their employment. In addition, any extra pays paid to a non-resident seasonal worker who has either notified their employer of their tax code or is in their first month of employment are subject to tax at the standard 10.5% rate. The general rule for calculating tax on an extra pay will not apply. Law: IT07 ss RD 10(2C), YA 1, sch 2, pt A, cl 8; TAA s 24C, sch 5  ¶3-197 Fishing boat workers A person is regarded as being self-employed when they receive payments under a share-fishing agreement for work or services that are exclusively or substantially in connection with operating or maintaining a registered fishing boat. The standard rate of tax to be deducted from payments made under such agreements is 20% (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Law: IT07 sch 4, pt E  ¶3-198 Cryptoasset payments In June 2019, Inland Revenue released two public rulings on whether remuneration paid to an employee in cryptoassets is subject to PAYE or FBT. For the purposes of the rulings, the term “cryptoasset” is used to cover digital assets that use cryptography  and blockchain technology to regulate their generation and verify transfers. Other terms that may be used include cryptocurrencies and tokens. (For a brief discussion of cryptoassets, see ¶5-219.) Note that in January 2021, Inland Revenue withdrew and replaced the two rulings with two further rulings with effect from 1 March 2021 (see Withdrawal Notice BR Pub 19/01 and BR Pub 19/02, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 33, No 1, February 2021 at 4). The income tax treatment in the rulings remained the same. However, the Commissioner was aware that some aspects of the arrangements ruled on and the commentary might be inconsistent with the Wages Protection Act 1983 and the Minimum Wage Act 1983, and this was addressed in the revised rulings. The Commissioner continues to be bound by the original rulings for arrangements entered into before their withdrawal. The first ruling, BR Pub 21/01, “Income tax — salary and wages paid in crypto-assets”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 33, No 1, February 2021 at 14, (which replaced BR Pub 19/01, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 7, August 2019 at 3, from 1 March 2021), confirms that cryptoassets received by employees as part of their regular remuneration are salary or wages and subject to the PAYE rules. As such the FBT rules will not apply. The ruling acknowledges that the position is not clear cut, but states: “38. It is unclear on the face of the legislation whether an employee who regularly receives crypto-assets as a part of their normal remuneration is subject to PAYE or whether FBT applies. Both views are arguable. 39. Broadly, the scheme of the Act is that consideration in money is subject to PAYE, whereas non-monetary benefits are subject to FBT. Crypto-assets are not money in the technical sense (although they share some of the characteristics of money). This might suggest that payments in crypto-assets should be subject to FBT. However, the distinction between monetary and non-monetary payments is not hard and fast. Statutory exceptions make some non-monetary benefits (such as employer-provided accommodation) subject to PAYE.  Further, the PAYE rules are drafted widely enough to potentially include some other non-monetary payments. 40. Ultimately, the issue turns on whether regular payments in crypto-assets come within the ordinary meaning of ‘salary or wages’ for tax purposes. The answer to this is not certain. While a regular payment received in crypto-assets has many of the hallmarks of salary and wages, historically salary and wages have been payments in money. However, s 6 of the Interpretation Act 1999 requires legislation to be interpreted as applying to modern circumstances. While not free from doubt, on balance, the Commissioner’s view is that for tax purposes, the concepts of ‘salary’ and ‘wages’ are wide enough to encompass some regular payments in crypto-assets (although employers will need to be aware of employment legislation). Consequently, these payments are ‘salary or wages’ under s RD 5 for tax purposes. Therefore, they are “PAYE income payments” under s RD 3 and the PAYE rules apply to them. 41. Because the payments are subject to PAYE, the FBT rules will not apply.” However, the ruling also states that not all types of cryptoassets will be subject to PAYE. To be considered “salary or wages” the cryptoassets need to be sufficiently similar to existing notions of salary and wages. In the Commissioner’s view, this will be the case where the cryptoassets have the following features: ▪ they are not subject to a “lock-up” period ▪ they can be converted directly into a flat currency (on an exchange), and either: □ a significant purpose of the cryptoasset is to function like a currency, or □ the value of the cryptoasset is pegged to one or more flat currencies.  For cryptoasset payments that are not subject to PAYE, the FBT rules will apply. The implications of a cryptoasset payment being subject to PAYE are that the employer must gross up the net amount of the cryptoassets provided to the employee when calculating PAYE. In addition, if a cryptoasset payment is not denominated in New Zealand dollars (NZD), it will be necessary to calculate the NZD value of the cryptoassets on the date they are paid to the employee. The cryptoasset payments must also be taken into account when calculating other obligations, eligibility or entitlements based on an employee’s salary or wages, such as KiwiSaver, Working for Families Tax Credits, and student loan repayments. The second ruling, BR Pub 21/02, “Income tax — bonuses paid in cryptoassets”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 33, No 1, February 2021 at 25, (which replaced BR Pub 19/02, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 7, August 2019 at 15, from 1 March 2021), considers the payment of an amount of cryptoassets to an employee as an incentive or bonus. The ruling concludes that such bonus payments come within the meaning of “salary or wages” and are therefore also “PAYE income payments” and subject to the PAYE rules. The ruling only applies to salary and wage earners, not selfemployed taxpayers, and where the cryptoassets being paid are an agreed deduction from a monetary amount. Other types of cryptoassets paid to an employee as an incentive or bonus will be fringe benefits and subject to FBT. Both the original public rulings, BR Pub 19/01 and BR Pub 19/02, applied for the three-year period from 1 September 2019 to 31 August 2022, and they continue to apply for arrangements entered into on or before 28 February 2021. The revised rulings, BR Pub 21/01 and BR Pub 21/02, apply from 1 March 2021 to 1 December 2022. For further rulings in the cryptoassets series, see also BR Pub 19/03, “Income tax — employer-issued crypto-assets provided to an employee” (at ¶21-436) and BR Pub 19/04, “Income tax —  application of the employee share scheme rules to employer issued crypto-assets provided to an employee” (at ¶3-470). Law: IT07 ss CE 1, RD 3, RD 5  ¶3-201 Commission agent Insurance agents and sub-agents or salespersons who receive a salary, retainer or other fixed remuneration plus commission from the same employer have their tax calculated using the appropriate PAYE tax table. When the recipient of a schedular payment is an employee, income that may have otherwise been treated as a schedular payment is regarded as salary and wages. See ¶3-044. An agent receiving only a commission has that commission taxed as a schedular payment. The standard rate of tax to be deducted from such payments is 20¢ in the dollar (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Law: IT07 sch 4, pt G  ¶3-202 Directors’ fees Under sch 4 pt B directors’ fees are schedular payments and the standard rate of tax to be deducted is 33%. However, whether tax must be deducted and at what rate depends upon a number of factors. IS 17/06 “Income tax — application of schedular payment rules to directors’ fees” In July 2017, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 17/06, “Income tax — application of schedular payment rules to directors’ fees” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 8, September 2017 at 7). The statement complements BR Pub 15/10, “GST — Directors’ fees” (see ¶32-061) by using some of the same fact scenarios and examples. The statement discusses the situations when tax must be withheld from the payment of directors’ fees and how much must be withheld. Whether a payment of a director’s fee  is a schedular payment largely depends on who has contracted to provide the directorship services the director’s fee is being paid for. If a director’s fee is not a schedular payment, there is no requirement to withhold tax from the payment. The rate at which tax must be withheld from a director’s fee that is a schedular payment depends on who is being paid and the information provided.  The statement contains the following flow chart that helps determine whether tax must be withheld from a director’s fee and, if so, at what rate. Note that the flow chart does not apply to a labour-hire business making a payment under a labour-hire arrangement. In such cases, the standard withholding rate is 20%.  IS 19/01 “Income tax — application of schedular payment rules to non-resident directors’ fees” In February 2019, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement, IS 19/01, “Income tax — application of schedular payment rules to non-resident directors’ fees” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 136). The statement provides guidance on when withholding is required from directors’ fees paid to non-residents and how much to withhold. There are two main differences between payments of directors’ fees to resident and non-resident directors. The first is that directors’ fees paid to non-residents might be nonresidents’ foreign-sourced income, in which case there is no requirement to withhold. The second difference is that the nonresident contractor regime might apply. Some payments to nonresident contractors are excluded from being schedular payments and there is therefore no requirement to withhold in relation to those payments. When directors’ fees are paid to a non-resident, it is first necessary to determine whether the fees have a New Zealand source or a foreign source. If the fees have a foreign source, the schedular payment rules do not apply and the payment can be made without withholding. The statement includes a discussion of the various source rules that might apply to determine when directors’ fees paid to a non-resident individual have a New Zealand source. The Commissioner considers most directors’ fees a New Zealand company pays to a non-resident individual will have a New Zealand source, regardless of whether the directorship services are performed in New Zealand or from overseas. This view differs from previous practice, which was to treat directors’ fees paid to a nonresident individual as having a source in New Zealand only to the extent the directorship services were performed in New Zealand. As a result, the Commissioner also released an Operational Position on IS 19/01, providing that the previous position could continue to be applied to payments of directors’ fees until 31 March 2019, but that the new position under IS 19/01 must generally be applied from 1 April 2019 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 158).  Directors’ fees a non-resident entity derives from a business carried on in New Zealand will have a New Zealand source if the business is wholly carried on in New Zealand. If the business is only partly carried on in New Zealand, the fees will have a New Zealand source only to the extent apportioned under s YD 5. A business of providing directorship services is likely to be carried on in New Zealand to the extent services are physically performed in New Zealand. Similarly, directors’ fees derived from a contract will have a New Zealand source to the extent they are paid for directorship services physically performed in New Zealand and as apportioned under s YD 5. The directors’ fees apportioned to a New Zealand source is the amount that would have been paid to an independent third party for carrying out the non-resident entity’s New Zealand directorship activities. Where the directors’ fees paid to a non-resident have a New Zealand source, the schedular payment rules will apply unless one of the exclusions applies. Where fees are paid to a non-resident company for directorship services performed or provided in New Zealand, that company will be a non-resident contractor and, unless an exclusion applies, the fees will be a schedular payment subject to withholding. However, the New Zealand-sourced portion of directors’ fees paid to a non-resident entity from a DTA country are likely to be excluded from the schedular payment rules provided the entity has not been, and will not be, present in New Zealand for more than 92 days in a 12-month period. Directors’ fees paid to non-resident contractors (individuals or entities) will also be excluded from the schedular payment rules if the total amount of contract payments the nonresident contractor has received for any contract services or activities performed in New Zealand do not exceed $15,000 in a 12month period. If the non-resident provides notification that they have an exemption, there is also generally no requirement to withhold. The statement contains several flowcharts that illustrate these conclusions. Any withholding required must then be completed at the correct rate. Note that there is a 15% minimum rate for an elected rate for nonresidents.  Law: IT07 sch 4 pt B  ¶3-204 Drovers, musterers and shearers The tax on the wages of an employee doing periodic droving and mustering work is calculated according to the ordinary weekly PAYE tables. If they supply their own dogs, horses or saddlery and receive allowances, the amount of the allowance to which the drover or musterer is entitled is deducted from his or her weekly wage and PAYE is deducted on the balance. Payments to a droving contractor or shearing contractor are schedular payments subject to a withholding tax deduction at the standard rate of 15¢ for every dollar of payment (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Payments made to shearers and shearing shedhands have PAYE deducted at a flat rate of 17.5¢ in the dollar and use the tax code “CAE”. Law: IT07 sch 4, pt C  ¶3-207 Election day workers An election day worker is a person engaged as a Deputy Returning Officer, poll clerk, interpreter, usher, or for any other purpose for: ▪ any general election, local election or poll ▪ an election or poll to which any of the provisions of the Electoral Act 1993 or the Local Electoral Act 2001 applies, or ▪ any other election or poll held simultaneously with and in the same premises as an election or poll in the categories above. Election day workers are taxed through the PAYE system at the flat rate of 17.5¢ in the dollar plus ACC earners’ levy, if they have  completed their tax code declaration form IR 330 (see ¶3-030) with the tax code “EDW”. The payment must be made by the authority controlling the election or poll. Also, the payment made must be exclusively for work done or services rendered immediately before, on, or immediately after the day of the election or poll. Law: IT07 s YA 1, sch 2, pt A, cl 7  ¶3-221 Extra pays Any lump sum payments made to an employee in relation to his or her employment are known as extra pays. Extra pays are specifically excluded from the definition of “salary or wages” and “schedular payments” under ss RD 5 and RD 7. These are payments that are not overtime and that are not regularly included in a pay period. Section RD 7 states that extra pays include such payments made as: ▪ bonuses ▪ gratuities ▪ back pay ▪ profit shares ▪ redundancy payments ▪ retiring allowances ▪ amounts derived for a restrictive covenant or exit inducement ▪ certain benefits under an employee share scheme (see ¶3-470) ▪ remedial payments of holiday pay (see ¶3-256), and ▪ an unrepaid PAYE income overpayment treated as extra pay under s RD 8B(2)(b).  The lump sum may be payable in two or more instalments and still qualify as an extra pay. Example 1: A company was accountable for PAYE deductions for lump sum payments made to its employees who were transferred in the course of their employment. The payments were to compensate the employees for the costs involved in changing accommodation. The Court of Appeal found that the payments were made in respect of, or in relation to, the employment of the person to whom they were made. They were, therefore, PAYE income payments (source deduction payments) to which the extra pay (extra emolument) rate applied. See Shell New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,303.  A payment is not necessarily an extra pay simply because it is not an actual part of an employee’s ordinary pay. Overtime and regular bonuses are not treated as extra pays but are added to any other salary and taxed accordingly. Rather than being taxed at the normal tax rates, all extra pays are taxed at a flat rate determined by reference to the level of the employee’s combined total of extra income and annualised value of all other PAYE income payments paid to the employee by the employer in the four weeks preceding the day the extra pay is paid. For the applicable rates of tax and income thresholds for extra pays see sch 2 pt B and ¶50-040. An exception applies for non-resident seasonal workers who have either notified their employer of their tax code or are in their first month of employment in New Zealand and for employees who have not notified their employer of their tax code. In the case of such nonresident seasonal workers, extra pays are taxed at the flat rate of 10.5%. In the case of employees with a non-notified tax code, the rate of tax on extra pays is 45%. An employee may elect that an extra pay be subject to a tax deduction at a higher rate. This election must be made on form IR 330.  Except for retirement and redundancy payments, extra pay payments must also have the ACC earners’ levy deducted from them. Example 2: In December 2017 an employee is to get a $1,000 bonus payment. Her gross earnings for the previous four weeks were $5,500. Thus: $ Last four weeks’ income  5,500  Multiply by 13 (to gross up to an annual income)  71,500  Add the bonus payment  1,000  Total  72,500  Because the income level was more than $70,000 (ie the threshold applicable in December 2017 for the 2017–18 income year), the tax rate applied to the bonus payment is 33%. The ACC earners’ account levy of 1.21% will also need to be added, making the total deduction 34.21%.  Law: IT07 ss RD 7, RD 10(2), (2C), (2D), RD 17, sch 2 pt B  ¶3-223 Forestry or bush workers Payments for forestry or bush work are schedular payments. The standard rate of tax to be deducted from such payments is 15¢ in the dollar (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Such work, under sch 4, pt C, includes bush felling, road and tramway work, removal of timber and undergrowth cutting, burning or clearing. Law: IT07 sch 4, pt C  ¶3-225 Fruit pickers, packers and pruners Under sch 4 pt C cl 1(b), the standard rate of tax to be deducted from payments made in relation to seasonal labour for agricultural,  horticultural and viticultural thinning, picking, packing and pruning activities (cultivation contract work) is 15¢ in the dollar (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). “Cultivation contract work” is defined broadly to include work or services provided under a contract or arrangement for, or substantially for, the supply of labour and in connection with land that is used, or intended to be used, for the cultivation of fruit crops, vegetables, orchards or vineyards. It does not, however, include work or services provided by a post-harvest facility, or a management entity that is responsible for payment for the work or services provided. Law: IT07 sch 4 pt C  ¶3-236 Game hunter or greenstone dealer Included as schedular payments are payments made by a purchaser (and this includes any auctioneer or dealer) to a seller of greenstone, eels, whitebait or sphagnum moss (“schedular natural products”). Not included are payments made to a natural products dealer (being a registered dealer or person who holds a natural product dealer certificate), payments made on a purchase after the goods were sold by a natural product dealer, payments made to an auctioneer or dealer acting as agent for the seller, or payments made in respect of goods purchased in a retail shop. Payments made to a game seller are also treated as schedular payments. “Game” is defined as all or part of wild deer, wild pigs or wild goats, whether dead or alive. The standard rate of tax to be deducted for such schedular payments is 25¢ for each dollar of payment made to the seller (if they have not elected another rate and are not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Law: IT07 sch 4, pt H  ¶3-241 Government grant or subsidy  If the Government pays a wage subsidy to an employer for employing someone who has been unemployed for a specified number of months, the employee is taxed on the wages he or she receives without any allowance for any subsidy the employer may receive. The wages expense claimed by the employer as a deduction from income for tax purposes must, however, be reduced by the amount of the subsidy received. Additionally, government grants and subsidies received by a registered person in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity are subject to GST.  ¶3-256 Holiday pay Holiday pay is income of an employee and includes any payment of salary or wages in lieu of holiday pay. “Holiday pay” encompasses payments made for annual leave, public holidays and alternative holidays. PAYE should be deducted from each payment of holiday pay as if the pay were part of the employee’s ordinary salary or wages. See s 86 of the Holidays Act 2003. Any lump sum payment of accrued holiday pay, for example, paid at the time an employee terminates employment, is an extra pay and tax should be deducted accordingly (see ¶3-221). Payment for any holiday leave period over the statutory minimum provided for in an employment agreement will also be included in assessable income. Payment for any industry holiday, for example, Dominion Day for law firms, will be included as holiday pay. Holiday pay does not include long-service leave, retirement leave, sick leave, bereavement leave or any other accruing entitlement in relation to employee remuneration (although note that a remedial payment does include such payments, see discussion below). Commissioner’s operational position on calculating PAYE on holiday pay On 11 March 2016, the Commissioner issued an operational position on calculating PAYE on holiday pay. This replaced an earlier version that had been released on 17 November 2015. The Commissioner’s position did not change from the earlier version, but the later version provided more information and explained things further.  When deducting PAYE on holiday pay, Inland Revenue is concerned with when the holiday pay is paid to the employee, rather than how the holiday pay is calculated. To decide whether a payment of holiday pay is salary or wages or extra pay, regardless of the status of the leave (ie accrued but not entitled, accrued and entitled, or anticipated leave) or how the holiday pay has arisen (person takes leave or end of employment), it is stated that the following general principles apply: ▪ Salary or wages: Holiday pay that is linked to the work days within the pay period is treated as salary or wages (ie where holiday pay is paid in substitution of an employee’s normal pay in a pay period; or 8% of a person’s gross earnings is included in the person’s regular pay). This is how the majority of holiday pay is paid to an employee. For example, a person who is paid weekly goes on leave for two weeks. That person continues to be paid weekly while they are away, but instead of their normal salary, they are paid five days of holiday pay in each pay period. These are salary or wages and not extra pays. The gross amount of holiday pay should be allocated appropriately to the number of days/weeks of leave taken and then the PAYE tables applied. ▪ Extra pay: A payment of holiday pay that is paid in addition to the regular pay for the pay period is treated as extra pay. These are payments that wouldn’t normally be paid in that pay period. For example, when a person takes leave and they request that their holiday pay is paid in a lump sum before their leave starts (ie the holiday pay is paid in an earlier pay period and not in the pay period to which the leave relates). For that particular pay period, the person would receive their normal pay plus the lump sum holiday pay. The regular pay should have normal PAYE deducted as usual by applying the PAYE table and the additional lump sum should have PAYE deducted using the deduction method for extra pay. [Although note the potential application of s RD 13 to advance payments of holiday pay, discussed below.]  The same applies when the remaining balance of a person’s leave entitlement (or 8% of gross earnings where there’s no leave entitlement) is paid as a lump sum in the person’s final pay at the end of their employment (ie the final pay consists of the person’s normal pay and an extra lump sum payment). The person’s normal pay should have normal PAYE deducted and the extra lump sum payment should have PAYE deducted using the deduction method for extra pay. This operational position does not affect the Commissioner’s position on the treatment of “cashed up” annual leave, which should continue to be treated as an “extra pay”. Non-resident seasonal workers Extra pays paid to non-resident seasonal workers who have either notified their employer of their tax code or who are in their first month of employment in New Zealand are taxed at the flat rate of 10.5%. See ¶3-193. Advance payments of holiday pay or salary or wage Employers have the option to tax holiday pay or salary or wages paid in advance as if the lump sum payment was paid over the pay periods to which it relates, or under the extra pay method. Section RD 13 of the Income Tax Act 2007 applies when an employee receives: ▪ an advance payment of salary or wages, or ▪ a lump sum payment of holiday pay made before the employee takes their holiday, if the employee’s employment is continuing. It does not apply to a lump sum payment of holiday pay made on termination of employment (which continues to be taxed as an extra pay). When the section applies, an employer can choose, for the purposes of withholding PAYE, to treat the lump sum payment: ▪ as an extra pay, or  ▪ as if it had been paid in its normal cycle for the pay periods to which it relates. If an employer chooses the latter option, the employer calculates the amount of PAYE to withhold from the lump sum payment by: ▪ apportioning the lump sum payment to the pay period or pay periods to which it relates based on the employee’s usual hours of work ▪ calculating the amount of PAYE for each portion of the lump sum, as if the portion were the only salary payment they made to the employee for the particular pay period, and ▪ adding together the PAYE amounts for each portion. If an employer, subsequent to making a lump sum payment to an employee where PAYE was calculated using this method, makes a salary payment to the employee for one of the pay periods to which the lump sum relates, the employer must calculate the amount of PAYE to be withheld from the salary payment by: ▪ adding together the salary payment and the portion of the lump sum that relates to the pay period ▪ calculating the amount of PAYE that would be required to be withheld from this aggregate amount, as if that amount were a single payment of salary paid by the employer to the employee for the pay period, and ▪ subtracting the amount of previously withheld PAYE for the portion of the lump sum that relates to the pay period. These changes do not apply for the purposes of calculating employee KiwiSaver contribution deductions or for the purposes of calculating student loan deductions from payments of salary or wages. For an example, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 5, June 2018 at 27.  Backdated remedial payment of holiday pay Retrospective amendments made in 2018 provide that, with effect from 1 April 2008, a backdated remedial payment of holiday pay is treated as an extra pay. Prior to the amendments, such payments were treated as salary or wages, or an extra pay, or a combination of both, depending on the circumstances which gave rise to the original payment of holiday pay. Backdated in this context means a payment that is being made because an earlier payment was insufficient. A remedial payment makes up for a shortfall in previous payments for entitlements under the Holidays Act or an employment agreement. This means that, as well as holiday pay, it covers payments made to correct other types of entitlements under the Holidays Act, such as sick leave, and under employment agreements, such as long service leave. A payment to rectify a shortfall in salary or wages will not be treated as an extra pay provided the shortfall is made up in one payment. Example 1: Julie was paid $300 in sick leave under the Holidays Act 2003 and $1,700 in long service leave under her employment agreement. Julie’s employer later discovers that both payments were incorrectly calculated. Julie should have been paid $350 in sick leave and $2,000 in long service leave. The difference between the amounts paid to Julie and Julie’s actual entitlements is $350. Julie’s employer pays her $200 to satisfy part of the difference. The payment of $200 is a remedial payment. Later, Julie’s employer pays her $150 to satisfy the remainder of the difference. The payment of $150 is a separate remedial payment. Each remedial payment is treated as an extra pay.  Example 2: An employer fails, on the regular payday of one of its employees, Tom, to pay any of the $1,000 in wages owed to Tom for the relevant pay period. The employer later makes a payment of $800 (payment 1) to Tom to address the failure to pay Tom’s wages on Tom’s regular payday, but a shortfall of $200 remains outstanding. Payment 1 is not a remedial payment. Sometime later still, the employer makes a further payment of $200 (payment 2) to Tom to address the shortfall in payment 1. Payment 2 is a remedial payment. Payment 2 is therefore an extra pay.  The legislative amendments replaced the Income Tax (Employmentrelated Remedial Payments) Regulations 2017, which had the same effect but applied only from 18 August 2017. A savings provision was also included in the amendments to protect the tax position of employers taken in relation to backdated remedial payments of holiday pay during the period from 1 April 2008 to 17 August 2017. Commissioner’s statement Following the introduction of the 2017 Regulations, the Commissioner released a Commissioner’s statement CS 17/02, “Tax treatment of backdated remedial payment of holiday pay”, which set out her approach to such payments. Although the Regulations have now been revoked, the general discussion contained in the statement is still relevant in providing the Commissioner’s view on these payments. The Commissioner’s view is that current year tax rates are applicable when withholding PAYE from the remedial payments. Employers do not have to make adjustments to employment income information for the previous tax years. The amount of the remedial payment and PAYE withheld simply needs to be recorded in the employment income information for the period in which the payments are made. Other deductions, such as student loan repayments and KiwiSaver contributions, should be made in the usual manner for current employees. Remedial payments made to former employees are also treated as extra pays. The Commissioner’s view is that it is the PAYE income payments paid by the employer making the remedial payment that must be annualised to determine the correct extra pay withholding rate (not those of the former employee’s current employer). If the former employee notifies the former employer of a student loan tax code, then student loan repayments should be deducted from the remedial payment. If the former employee has given the former employer a KiwiSaver deduction notice (either while they were in employment or at the time a remedial payment is made), the employer must deduct KiwiSaver contributions. Employers should check the current KiwiSaver status of former employees as their  circumstances may have changed (eg they may have been granted a contribution holiday). As a general rule, if an employer is required to deduct KiwiSaver contribution from a payment of salary or wages, that employer is also required to pay compulsory employer contribution. A remedial payment made to a former employee who is not a KiwiSaver member at the time of payment will not be considered “new employment” and will not trigger the automatic enrolment rules under the KiwiSaver Act. Deductibility For discussion on the deductibility of holiday pay, see ¶10-052 and ¶10-292. Ordering requirements In most cases, there will be accrued holiday pay for which companies have previously been allowed a deduction. Although the legislation does not specify what ordering system should be used for accrued holiday pay, in accordance with Devaynes v Noble (Clayton’s Case) (1816) 35 ER 781, the crediting of holidays taken against holiday leave entitlements will be regarded as being paid out on a first in, first out basis. Consequently, an employer must use up the existing accrued holiday pay for an employee before the employer can credit leave against newly accruing leave entitlements. The same first in, first out rules apply to all accruals of employment income. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 9, June 1992 at 5. See also ¶10-292. Law: IT07, ss RD 7, RD 10(2C), (2D), RD 13; HOL ss 5, 86  ¶3-263 Koha In October 2015, Inland Revenue (IR) updated its position on koha. Previously, IR had stated that in its view any unconditional gift given by non-members of the marae is not liable for income tax, but that any gift from a member of the marae was not unconditional. However, such a gift was also usually not liable for income tax because it came from within the membership of the marae.  IR has now acknowledged that the tax treatment of koha is not always straightforward and it should be determined on a case-bycase basis. IR’s fact sheet, IR 278 (December 2015), explains the tax treatment of payments and gifts in the Māori community. The fact sheet states that koha made voluntarily without the giver receiving a benefit or material advantage is not liable for GST or income tax. Koha may involve the need to make a PAYE deduction by an employer if there is an employer–employee relationship. See IR 278.  ¶3-271 Labour-only building contractor Payment for work done or services rendered under a contract or an arrangement that is exclusively or substantially for the supply of labour in connection with a building or a construction is a schedular payment if the nature of the service falls within the categories listed under sch 4 pt E. Examples of such services include roof-fixing, erecting fences, laying concrete, hanging wallpaper, painting, plastering, installing insulating materials and carpentry. The standard rate of tax to be deducted from such payments is 20¢ in the dollar (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Law: IT07 sch 4 pt E  ¶3-275 Labour-hire firm contractors The schedular payment rules specifically cover all contractors operating through labour-hire firms, so that labour-hire firms are required to withhold from any payments made to their contractors. They must withhold at the relevant rate (see ¶3-044), with the standard rate set at 20% (see sch 4 pt J). A labour-hire arrangement is one where a firm arranges for workers to do work for clients. The labour-hire firm receives payment from the client and pays the worker themselves. The withholding applies where there is a labour-hire arrangement, one of the payer’s main activities is the business of providing labour-hire services, and the  payment is made for that business (that is, the labour-hire arrangement is not incidental to another business). Arranging for person to work for client “Arranging for a person to perform work or services directly for clients” means that there is an agreement to provide a worker to the client, and the worker will then provide their services at the general direction of the client. This does not include a contract in which the parties agree to deliver a given result or outcome. For example, if a contract provided for Firm A to make available some painters to a building company to work for them for a period of time, and the painters work at the general instruction of the building company, then Firm A would be arranging for a person to perform work or services. In contrast, if a contract provided for a painting company to paint houses for a building company, and the painting company contracted some labourers to work for it in completing the service, the contract between the painting company and building company would be a contract for a service to produce a given result (the painted houses) rather than a contract arranging for a person to “perform work or services directly for clients”. Main activity of business For something to be one of the main activities of the business requires the activity to be more than incidental to other activities of the firm. For example, a wedding planner may arrange for persons to perform makeup or other services directly for clients, but because this is incidental to the main activity of the planner it will not make the wedding planner a labour-hire firm. A business may have more than one main activity. For example, a labour-hire firm may have main activities of providing workers directly, as well as providing direct contracting work. The key question to ask is whether arranging to provide workers directly is being done in a business of its own right, or whether it is merely a requirement or incidental activity of another activity of the business. Example 1:  IT Universe Ltd provides contractors to other businesses to help with their IT projects. X Co asks IT Universe Ltd for IT contractors to help with an upgrade of its systems. IT Universe Ltd provides one of their contractors (Steve, a New Zealand resident) to assist X Co. Steve works at the general direction of X Co.  IT Universe Ltd is arranging for a worker (Steve) to provide work directly for their client (X Co). As a result, they are in a labour-hire arrangement with Steve and X Co and this arrangement is part of their labour-hire business. IT Universe Ltd is required to withhold tax from any payments to Steve. The rate will be the applicable rate as set out above. If Steve has not elected a rate, the standard rate for labour-hire firm contractors of 20% will apply.  Example 2: Paul is a builder and contracts to build a house for Susan. He subcontracts another contractor, Bruce, to do the plumbing work for the house. Paul is not required to withhold from payments to Bruce because he is not arranging for workers to perform work directly for clients. Instead Paul is arranging to produce a specified output for Susan (building a house). Examples adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 53–55.  No company exception The general exception to the schedular payment rules for companies does not apply to payments under labour-hire arrangements. Labour-hire firms must withhold from payments regardless of the type of legal entity the payments are made to. Companies may apply for a tailored tax code to reduce their withholding rate if necessary. Associated party transactions Where the payer and the payee are associated under s YB 2 or s YB 3 of the Income Tax Act, being two companies or a company and a  person other than a company, the rules do not apply unless the payer so chooses. This is intended to prevent the rules applying, and additional compliance costs being imposed, in situations where payments are effectively made between entities that are part of the same business. Example 3: Workforce 1 Ltd is a labour-hire firm that provides workers to perform work directly for clients. As part of its business structure Workforce 1 Ltd chooses to have its sales, marketing and client-facing side of the business managed by Workforce 1 Ltd while its staff management is handled by Workforce 2 Ltd. Workforce 1 Ltd and Workforce 2 Ltd are part of a wholly-owned group. Workforce 1 Ltd pays Workforce 2 Ltd part of the fees received by clients in order to pay their contractors.  Workforce 1 Ltd and Workforce 2 Ltd are wholly-owned companies and as a result are associated under s YB 2. As a result, payments made to Workforce 2 Ltd by Workforce 1 Ltd will not be subject to withholding under the labour-hire firm rules unless Workforce 1 Ltd chooses to apply sch 4 pt J. Workforce 2 Ltd will still need to withhold from payments it makes to its contractors. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 56.  Exempt payments New Zealand resident contractors working for labour-hire firms will not be able to have their payments treated as exempt payments (see ¶3-044). They can apply for a special tax rate of 0% if withholding is inappropriate. The Commissioner may notify non-resident contractors who work for labour-hire firms that the payments they receive are exempt from any withholding.  Law: IT07 sch 4 pt J  ¶3-281 Resident entertainers and sportspersons Payments for services connected with the following activities are deemed to be schedular payments: any sporting event or competition of any nature (including motor racing and rallies, motor cycle and motor boat racing, horse racing and trotting), lectures, speeches or talks, or any performance by actors, entertainers, musicians, singers, dancers, models and comperes, etc (whether alone or not). However, payments made to the following persons are not “schedular payments”: ▪ persons fully or partly funded under a government cultural programme ▪ official representatives of a body that administers a game or sport in an overseas country ▪ persons undertaking an activity or performance under a programme of a foundation, trust or organisation outside New Zealand which exists for the promotion of a cultural activity and is not carried on for individual profit of the member or shareholder. Generally, entertainers are regarded as being self-employed when they work out their own act or routine, supply their own equipment and do not work for one person on a permanent basis. The standard rate of tax to be withheld from these payments is 20¢ for each dollar of payment, provided the payment is to a New Zealand resident or their agent or another person acting on their behalf. Where the New Zealand resident is an apprentice jockey or driver and the payment relates to shares of riding or driving fees and is made to the resident or their agent or another person acting on their behalf, the standard rate of tax is 15¢ for each dollar of the payment.  Payments made to a person who has made a contribution for television, radio, theatre, stage or the printed media have a standard rate of tax of 25¢ for each dollar, as do payments relating to personal attendances for exhibiting or demonstrating goods. Fees or remuneration that relate to modelling, including a personal attendance for any promotional purpose, for photography, for supplying personal photographs, or for supplying personal endorsements or statements have a standard rate of tax of 20¢ for each dollar of payment. All of the above rates apply if the New Zealand resident has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044). For discussion regarding schedular payments on prize money paid to resident entertainers at sporting events or competitions, see ¶3457. See ¶50-080 for a full list of rates of tax for schedular payments. Law: IT07 sch 4 pt F  ¶3-282 Non-resident sports personalities and entertainers Non-resident entertainers (including sportspersons) are persons not resident in New Zealand, who, while visiting New Zealand, perform or participate in a resident entertainer’s activities, ie sporting events, lectures, musical performances, etc. Payments made to them (or their agent or a person acting on their behalf) are schedular payments and the standard rate of tax to be deducted is 20¢ in the dollar. For discussion regarding schedular payments on prize money paid to non-resident entertainers at sporting events or competitions, see ¶3-457. Non-resident entertainers and sportspersons deriving income from activities or performances occurring under certain cultural  programmes may qualify for an exemption under s CW 20. See ¶26485. Law: IT07 s YA 1, sch 4 pt F  ¶3-286 Non-resident contractors Payments made to a non-resident contractor (whether they are a company or individual) where the payment relates to a contract activity or service in New Zealand are schedular payments and withholding tax must be deducted. Where contract payments are made the payer should ensure that they hold a completed tax rate notification for contractors (IR 330C) for the non-resident contractor. The standard tax rate for schedular payments to non-resident contractors (irrespective of whether they are companies or individuals) is generally 15%: refer to sch 4 pt A. However, if the schedular payment is a kind of payment with a rate specifically provided for in another part of sch 4 (eg the 25% rate applying to payment for media contributions carried out by freelance contributors) that specific rate is the rate that should be applied. See ¶26-480 and Interpretation Statement IS 10/04, “Non-resident contractor schedular payments”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 31. Note that the standard rate may not apply if the contractor has elected a rate or is subject to a special or prescribed rate: see ¶3-044. Several exemptions exist for payments made to non-resident contractors: see ¶26-480. For discussion regarding schedular payments made to non-resident contractors in the screen production industry, see ¶3-328 and ¶3457. Law: IT07 ss RD 8(1)(b)(iv), (v), (vi), RD 24, sch 4 pt A; TAA s 24H, sch 5 pt C  ¶3-291 Non-resident employee of overseas firms  A non-resident person is generally not liable for New Zealand tax if his or her visit is less than 92 days in a tax year and his or her employer is a non-resident. See ¶26-420. However, Inland Revenue’s policy requires non-resident companies to deduct PAYE from the salary and wages of a non-resident employee irrespective of whether he or she spends less than 92 days working in New Zealand. The Commissioner can accept from an employer or PAYE intermediary a bond or other form of security in substitution for any liability to withhold PAYE that would arise in respect of non-resident employees if the liability of the employee to tax is uncertain due to the 92-day tax exemption under s CW 19 of the Income Tax Act 2007 or from a similar tax agreement. Liability to withhold PAYE deductions in respect of the employee would recommence only if the Commissioner specifies to an employer or PAYE intermediary a date after which deductions are to be made or if the employee becomes liable to income tax. See ¶26-430. Law: IT07 ss CW 19, RD 23  ¶3-292 Non-resident teachers and researchers Generally, non-resident teachers and researchers are taxed on New Zealand-derived salary and wages. However, relief is available if there is a legislative exemption or the teacher is resident in a country that has a double tax treaty with New Zealand. General exemptions are available when the teacher or researcher: ▪ is in New Zealand for less than 92 days in a 12-month period and meets certain other requirements under s CW 19 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (see ¶26-420), or ▪ works for or on behalf of a non-resident or is paid an allowance under an assistance programme entered into by the New Zealand Government: see s CW 22 and ¶5-638. The Commissioner’s current policy on the tax treatment of salary and wages derived by non-resident teachers and researchers in New  Zealand is found in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 8, January 1995 at 4. If it is clear from the employee’s immigration documents or contract of employment that the employee’s presence in New Zealand will be less than either 92 or 183 days, the employee may apply for a NIL tailored tax rate certificate. On issue of such certificate, the employee will not be liable for tax on any amount derived from teaching or researching services in New Zealand. In other cases, educational institutions employing a visiting teacher or researcher will be obliged to deduct PAYE. Alternatively, a bond arrangement may be entered into with Inland Revenue under s RD 23. See ¶26420 and ¶26-430. Law: IT07 ss CW 19, CW 22  ¶3-294 Outworkers and pieceworkers Where an outworker is paid according to output, PAYE must be deducted from the payment. The payment is treated as a payment for the period that runs from the date the work starts to the date of its completion. Generally, pieceworkers employed in factories are paid on a regular basis, ie weekly, fortnightly or monthly. In cases where payments for piecework or outwork are made for irregular periods, the procedure is as follows: ▪ Treat the payments as having been earned uniformly over the period in which the work was carried out. ▪ The entire period from commencement to completion should be divided into complete weeks and the payment allocated uniformly as per the first bullet point. Any odd days should be treated as being for an extra week. ▪ Calculate the PAYE for each week separately and add up the PAYE to arrive at the total amount to deduct. Payments to a labour-only contractor in the building industry are schedular payments liable for tax.  See Inland Revenue’s publication IR 335, “Employer’s Guide”, October 2020 at 55. Law: IT07 s RD 15(2), (4)  ¶3-296 Payment to working partners Payments to a working partner may be treated as salary or wages subject to PAYE tax deductions, provided certain requirements are met. The requirements are that the partner is employed under a written contract of service signed by all the partners and the contract specifies the amount payable and the terms and conditions of the services to be performed by the partner. In such cases, PAYE and ACC levies must be deducted from such salaries and accounted for on form IR 348. See ¶23-132. Law: IT07 s RD 5(3)  ¶3-301 Pay in lieu of notice When an employee is dismissed and given pay in lieu of notice, that pay should be treated as an extra pay for tax deduction purposes, not as ordinary salary or wages. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 13, May 1995 at 20.  ¶3-303 IR 56 taxpayers Certain types of employees are responsible for paying their own PAYE instead of their employers deducting the tax from their earnings. For example, private domestic workers are required to account for their own PAYE. See ¶3-306. Other examples include embassy staff, New Zealand-based representatives of overseas companies and United States Antarctic Program personnel. These workers are known as “IR 56 taxpayers”. An IR 56 taxpayer should register as an employer with Inland Revenue (IR) using form IR 359 (June 2019). Registration may also be completed online through IR’s website. The IR 56 taxpayer must  also complete a tax code declaration form (IR 330) and a new employee and KiwiSaver details form (IR 346K). IR 56 taxpayers calculate the tax deduction from their total earnings each month in the same way as an employer would do for an employee. These taxpayers must complete and file their employment information (IR 348) within 10 working days of the end of the month. They must also remit PAYE deductions (including the ACC earners’ levy and any relevant child support, student loan repayment or KiwiSaver deductions) to IR by the 20th of the month following the month in which the relevant earnings are received. See s RD 4. IR 56 taxpayers should complete the IR 56 summary forms (see IR 356, “IR 56 taxpayer’s handbook”, July 2020) to record their monthly gross wages and PAYE deductions and keep these summaries as a permanent record. Law: IT07 ss RD 4(4), RD 16  ¶3-306 Private domestic worker As defined in s YA 1, a private domestic worker means a person employed by any other person if: (a) the employer is the occupier, or 1 of the occupiers, of a dwellinghouse or other premises used exclusively for residential purposes; and (b) the employment is for the performance of work in or about the dwellinghouse or premises or the garden or grounds belonging to the dwellinghouse or premises; and (c) the employment is not for a business carried on by the employer or an occupation or calling of the employer; and (d) the employment is not regular full-time employment. No tax deduction is required to be made by an employer from any PAYE income payment (ie salary or wages or a schedular payment) made to a private domestic worker. Instead, the worker is required to  account directly to Inland Revenue (IR) for PAYE as an “IR 56 taxpayer”. See ¶3-303. The reason for this provision appears to be to avoid the necessity for a householder to assume the duties of an employer when hiring assistance. The provision applies only to the work done for a householder in a private capacity, such as work done by homehelpers, attendant caregivers, nannies and gardeners. A person who does what might be described as domestic work for a business, such as gardening or lawn mowing in the grounds of a factory, is not a private domestic worker and should be regarded as an employee or contractor with tax deducted in the normal manner. In addition, a person only qualifies as a private domestic worker if they work parttime. Inland Revenue considers part-time employment for this purpose to be no more than 30 hours per week on average for each employer. If a person works full-time, the responsibility for PAYE falls on the employer. See also IR’s booklet IR 356, “IR 56 taxpayer’s handbook”, July 2020. In some cases, a private domestic worker may not be required to file a tax return. Law: IT07 ss RD 16, YA 1  ¶3-310 Prize for sales competition When a competition is run by an employer among their sales personnel with a cash prize for the best sales results, the cash prize is assessable income of the recipient. Tax deductions should be made according to the salesperson’s tax status and applicable tax rate. Non-cash prizes are not assessable income in the hands of the recipient, although they may be subject to fringe benefit tax (FBT). The status of non-cash prizes as non-assessable income was confirmed in the case Sixton v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,285. The Court found that the benefit received by the taxpayer was not an allowance. It was a non-monetary perquisite or emolument and was  not included within the meaning of the term “allowance”. The fact that the benefit may have been convertible into cash is irrelevant once it has been decided that the benefit is not an allowance.  ¶3-313 Redundancy payments and retiring allowances Redundancy payments and retiring allowances are fully taxable to the recipient. The full amount of the payment is treated as an extra pay (see ¶3-221) and is subject to 10.5%, 17.5%, 30%, 33% or 39% tax at the time of payment. The withholding rate that applies is determined based on the combined total of the extra pay and the annualised value of the PAYE income payments paid to an employee in the previous four weeks. Employers need not deduct the ACC earners’ account levy from redundancy payments or retiring allowances. Law: IT07 s RD 10(2), sch 2, pt B  ¶3-317 Retraining payment The Commissioner’s policy regarding the tax treatment of retraining payments made in lieu of a redundancy payment is set out in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 3, September 1995 at 6. The Commissioner considers that retraining payments received by an employee upon termination of employment are more in the nature of a redundancy payment than a bursary payment eligible for exemption under s CW 36 (see ¶5-633). Retraining payments are therefore considered to fall within the definition of employment income and are taxable in the hands of the former employee under s CE 1. Consequently, an employer must deduct PAYE from the amount of any such payment. Law: IT07 s CE 1  ¶3-326 School children  School children and students earning income are liable to income tax the same as other taxpayers. However, school children may qualify for an exemption if: ▪ the income is none of the following: □ a PAYE income payment from which the person’s employer is required to withhold tax under the PAYE rules □ resident passive income □ non-resident passive income □ excluded income □ exempt income, and ▪ the total income derived in the tax year is less than $2,340. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes to add beneficiary income to the above list of types of income excluded from the tax exemption. The amendment is intended to apply retrospectively from the 2012–13 income year, the original application date of the exemption provision. However, a savings provision will apply for taxpayers who took a tax position relying on the current law in a return filed before the date the Bill was introduced. Law: IT07 s CW 55BB  ¶3-328 Screen and media production Payments made for work done or services rendered in the screen and media production industry are subject to a standard rate of 20% withholding tax (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). More specifically, the rate applies to the production of television, video or films. It includes work or services of a nature commonly  involved in the on-set and off-set pre-production, production and post-production processes. However, media contribution fees, being payments made for a contribution to television, radio, theatre, stage or printed media, are subject to a standard rate of 25%. For discussion on the exemption for daily allowances paid in the screen production industry, see ¶3-457. Law: IT07 sch 4 pt F  ¶3-341 Secondary employment An employee who already has a regular job and who takes on a second job should be taxed at the secondary earner rate on earnings from his or her secondary employment. See the notes to form IR 330 for tax codes and thresholds relating to secondary employment earnings. Law: IT07 sch 2, pt A, cls 4, 5, 6, 9  ¶3-351 Shearing contractors Payments made to a shearing contractor (who may employ other shearers) are schedular payments. The standard rate of withholding tax for such payments is 15¢ in the dollar (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). If the contractor produces a certificate issued by Inland Revenue (IR) that the payment is exempt, the farmer is not required to withhold tax from the payment. See ¶3-044 and ¶3-204. Whether or not the farmer has deducted tax from payments made to the contractor, a contractor paying employees must make PAYE tax deductions from the payments and must account to IR for those deductions in the same manner as other employers. For employees who are casual agricultural employees PAYE must be deducted at the flat rate of 17.5¢ in the dollar. Law: IT07 s RD 20, sch 4, pt C  ¶3-356 Income-tested benefit Payment of an income-tested benefit is treated as a payment of salary or wages. Normal PAYE tax deductions are made by the department responsible for the Social Security Act 2018. An income-tested benefit is any of the following benefits paid under the Social Security Act 2018: ▪ sole parent support ▪ emergency benefit ▪ youth payment ▪ supported living payment ▪ jobseeker support, and ▪ young parent payment. An income-tested benefit also includes main benefit equivalent assistance, which is special assistance granted under the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support (NZSOS) Programme that corresponds to any of the benefits set out above. The NZSOS Programme enables payments to be made to New Zealand beneficiaries who are stranded overseas as a result of COVID-19, as these individuals would otherwise lose entitlement to their normal payments. Payments made under the NZSOS Programme are subject to the same tax treatment as their standard counterparts. Law: IT07 ss RD 5(6), RD 11(1), YA 1  ¶3-361 Visitor A visitor to New Zealand who works while here is liable for tax on income derived from that work unless a specific exemption applies. PAYE tax deductions should be made from any salary or wages paid to that person.  Criteria within s CW 19 may operate to exempt income that a nonresident person derives from performing personal or professional services in New Zealand during a visit. See ¶26-420 for the relevant criteria.  ¶3-366 Voluntary worker for an approved charity A voluntary worker in receipt of regular salary, wages or allowances from an approved charitable organisation is deemed to be an employee and PAYE must be deducted from his or her earnings. Law: IT07 ss CE 1, RD 3  INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR OR EMPLOYEE ¶3-376 Distinction between employee and independent contractor A distinction must be drawn between an employee and an independent contractor. Payments to an employee constitute payments of salary or wages that are subject to the PAYE system. An independent contractor, on the other hand, is taxed on the basis that he or she is carrying on a business. For a payment for personal services to constitute a payment of salary or wages it must be paid on account of an employment relationship. Whether a person is an employee or a self-employed person needs to be established to determine tax deductions under subpart RD of the Income Tax Act 2007, the deductibility of expenses, ACC levies and GST. The application of tax law to the question of the employee/contractor distinction turns on the terms “contract for services” and “contract of service”. These terms are not defined so heavy reliance is placed on the general contract law developed by the courts. A person will have the same employment status for tax purposes as under general law.  Thus, there are two forms of an employment relationship. They are a contract of service, which relates to an employee, and a contract for services, which relates to an independent contractor. Employees have a contract of service with their employer. This has evolved over time from the early concept of a master-servant relationship. A contract for services applies to an independent contractor and a principal. This type of relationship emphasises the nature of the services to be provided rather than the availability to work as directed by another. Tax status and relationship to employment law Section 6 of the Employment Relations Act 2000 (the ERA) defines “employee” as “any person of any age employed by an employer to do any work for hire or reward under a contract of service”. While this definition only applies to the ERA, the Supreme Court recognised in Bryson v Three Foot Six Ltd (2005) 22 NZTC 19,242 (SC) that the appropriate test here reflects the traditional common law test. Accordingly, s 6 decisions can be relevant when determining employment status for tax purposes to the extent that these decisions consider and apply the common law tests: see ¶3389. It seems likely, therefore, that a worker who is an employee under the ERA will almost certainly be an employee for tax purposes. Section 6 of the ERA provides that, in deciding whether a person is employed by another person under a contract of service, that Act, the Employment Court or the Employment Relations Authority (as the case may be) must determine the real nature of the relationship between them. The court or the Authority must consider all relevant matters, including any matters that indicate their intention, and is not to treat as a determining matter any statement by them that describes the nature of their relationship. In determining whether a taxpayer is an independent contractor or an employee, it becomes, for tax purposes, a question of fact and law. The leading New Zealand Supreme Court case on employees and independent contractors is Bryson v Three Foot Six Ltd (2005) 22 NZTC 19,242. Before this case was decided, the leading authority  was TNT Worldwide Express (NZ) Ltd v Cunningham (1993) 15 NZTC 10,234 (CA). Bryson v Three Foot Six Ltd In Bryson v Three Foot Six Ltd (2005) 22 NZTC 19,242, the New Zealand Supreme Court confirmed that the question of whether a person was an employee or an independent contractor was ultimately one of fact. Mr Bryson was engaged by Weta Workshops (Weta) in February 2000 as an independent contractor. Two months later, Bryson was seconded to an associated company of Weta, Three Foot Six Ltd, to work as a set model technician. For the first two weeks, his contractual relationship was still with Weta. After that time, he negotiated an agreement with Three Foot Six, although no formal written agreement was entered into at that time. He received training for the first six weeks with Three Foot Six and worked set hours. He was paid overtime for extra hours. His work was determined and vetted by Three Foot Six. About six months after Bryson’s secondment, Three Foot Six supplied Bryson with a written contract referred to as the “crew deal memo”. The contract referred to Bryson as a “contractor” or an “independent contractor”. It also made provision for ACC levies and the deduction of withholding tax. In August 2001 Three Foot Six made Bryson redundant. Bryson took a case to the Employment Relations Authority alleging unfair dismissal. Three Foot Six argued that Bryson was an independent contractor and not an employee as defined in s 6 of the ERA. The Authority determined that Bryson was an independent contractor and not an employee. On appeal to the Employment Court, it was determined that Bryson was an employee. Three Foot Six appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal held that Bryson was an independent contractor. This decision was made on the grounds that the judge in the Employment Court had made a fundamental error in the view she took of the legal requirements of s 6 of the ERA. The New Zealand Supreme Court restored the decision of the Employment Court, ie that Bryson was an employee and not an independent contractor. Bryson was, therefore, able to bring a claim  for personal grievance against Three Foot Six. When considering the approach taken by the judge in the Employment Court, the specific requirements of s 6 of the ERA were discussed. With respect to the requirement under that section to consider “all relevant matters”, the Supreme Court stated that the following items must be considered: ▪ the written and oral terms of the contract between the parties ▪ the way in which the parties have actually behaved in implementing their contract (ie how the contractual relationship operated in practice) ▪ features of control and integration, and ▪ whether the contracted person has been effectively working on his or her own account (the fundamental test). The Supreme Court also stated that it is not usually possible for the Employment Court or Employment Authority to examine the relationship of the contractual parties in light of the control, integration and fundamental tests until it had first examined the terms and conditions of the contract and the way in which it actually operated in practice. Note that at the time the Supreme Court decided the case, Inland Revenue (IR) had not challenged Three Foot Six’s arrangements with cast and crew under the crew deal memo. TNT Worldwide Express (NZ) Ltd v Cunningham In TNT Worldwide Express (NZ) Ltd v Cunningham (1993) 15 NZTC 10,234, the Court of Appeal found that an owner-driver courier for TNT was self-employed and not an employee and accordingly was not entitled to invoke the personal grievance provisions of the Employment Contracts Act 1991. The Employment Court and the Employment Tribunal had held that the owner-driver was an employee. The Court of Appeal’s decision reversed that finding. The owner-driver was engaged by TNT to conduct a courier service for the company under a written contract. When his contract was  terminated, he sought to bring a personal grievance claim to the Employment Tribunal alleging unjustified dismissal. However, TNT maintained that the owner-driver courier was an independent contractor and thus not able to use the personal grievance provisions of the Employment Contracts Act 1991 to challenge the termination of his contract. Both the Employment Tribunal and the Employment Court focused on the extent of control given to TNT rather than the written contract between the parties. The Court of Appeal found that if the relationship between the parties is governed by a comprehensive written contract, and that contract is not a sham, then the nature of the relationship should be determined from the terms of the contract. The Court noted that the classic test for distinguishing between an employee and an independent contractor was the “control test”. It was considered, however, that this test, although important, could no longer be regarded as the sole determining factor. The increasing use of contracts for services in many business activities must be recognised by the courts. IR considers that couriers who are employed under contracts similar to the contract in the TNT case are independent contractors for tax purposes. Such couriers must account to IR for income tax and GST on this basis. Allowable business expenses are deductible. ACC levies will also be payable to the Accident Compensation Corporation. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 1, July 1993 at 5. Tests for distinguishing between an employee and an independent contractor IR and the courts have developed several tests for distinguishing between an employee and a contractor: ▪ Control — this test considers the degree of control the employer exerts over the work an employee or contractor is to do and the manner in which the work is performed. The greater the control an employer has over the work content, hours worked and the method used as well as supervision, and the right to dismiss an employee, the more likely it is that the relationship is one of employer-employee.  ▪ Organisation or integration — the purpose of this test is to determine whether the person is really integrated into the business. The work performed is likely to indicate the person is an employee if: □ the person is integral to the operation of the business □ it is the type of work done by other employees □ the work is continuous rather than “one-off” in nature, and □ the work is for the benefit of the business rather than the worker. ▪ Independence — a worker who has a high level of independence is more likely to be a contractor. This is in contrast with a high level of control exercised by an employer. Factors to consider include: □ Does the worker work for other clients? □ Does the worker supply all the necessary tools, premises and materials? □ Is the worker responsible for hiring staff to help with the job? □ Does the worker invoice for the work? □ Is the worker responsible for paying the accounts, taxes and government levies? ▪ Intention — this test examines the intentions of the parties regarding the nature of the relationship. A written contract indicating an employee-employer relationship may indicate the intentions of the parties but it will not be conclusive if it can be shown from the circumstances that the worker is actually an independent contractor. ▪ Economic reality (also referred to as “the fundamental test”) — is the worker genuinely in business on his or her own account?  This test examines such factors as: □ The behaviour of the parties prior to and after entering the contract. □ Who is legally responsible for the job, ie when the work is substandard and needs to be corrected. □ Whether the job justifies or requires using an independent contractor. □ Whether there is a deadline for completing the work. □ Whether the worker can be dismissed. IR released interpretation guideline IG 16/01, “Determining employment status for tax purposes (employee or independent contractor?)”, in March 2016 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 97). The guideline discusses the differences between contracts of service and contracts for services, sets out the five tests outlined above and discusses the leading New Zealand authorities on the issue. The guideline also concludes that decisions under s 6 of the ERA are relevant in determining the status of a worker to the extent those decisions reflect the common law. The courts will also take into account the following indicia: ▪ contractors are not paid holiday pay or sick pay and, with some exceptions (mainly commission sales agents), they are responsible for paying their own ACC levies ▪ contractors are not usually provided with fringe benefits such as company cars and health insurance — these are their responsibilities ▪ contractors are usually registered for GST and provide GST tax invoices ▪ it is possible to control the work performed by a contractor, but not the manner in which it is done  ▪ a contractor may employ staff or subcontract work ▪ a contractor is able to work for more than one person, although, in practice, there may be exceptions to this ▪ a written contract for service should exist, and ▪ IR and the courts will look to the intention of the parties and their actions, rather than only at the written contract (if one exists). Simply calling a person a contractor is insufficient; it must be supported by actions. If IR carries out an investigation of a person claiming to be a contractor, the onus of proof and possibility of penalties is as much on the hirer as on the contractor. The fact that the parties may have described themselves as “company” and “contractor”, and that they were so named in the contract, can also assist in resolving any doubt as to whether there is an independent contractor relationship. For example, see Case U9 (1999) 19 NZTC 9,077, Mabon v The Conference of the Methodist Church of New Zealand (1998) 5 NZELC 95,834, Coro Trading Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,495, Case Z10 (2009) 24 NZTC 14,113. Law: IT07 s CE 1  ¶3-386 Consequence of being employee versus contractor The distinction between employees and independent contractors is important for a number of purposes including: ▪ deduction of expenses: employees are prevented from claiming deductions for employment-related expenditure, whereas independent contractors are generally entitled to deduct business expenses ▪ PAYE tax deductions: payments to employees constitute payments of salary or wages that are subject to PAYE tax  deductions, whereas payments to independent contractors are not subject to the PAYE tax deduction system, although they may be schedular payments subject to withholding tax deductions ▪ goods and services tax (GST): employees cannot register for or charge GST for services they supply as employees, but independent contractors may have to register and charge GST, and ▪ payment of accident compensation levies: independent contractors must account to the Accident Compensation Corporation for ACC levies for themselves and any employees.  ¶3-389 Film production workers The employment status of persons working in the film production industry has been clarified, and legislated on, as a result of negotiations to enable the two Hobbit movies to be made in New Zealand. Actors, voice-over actors, stand-ins, body doubles, stunt performers, extras, singers, dancers, musicians, entertainers and other persons engaged in film production work are excluded from the definition of “employee” in the Employment Relations Act 2000. These persons are consequently independent contractors unless their written employment agreement expressly provides otherwise.  ¶3-391 Commission agents not including insurance agents In deciding on the employer/independent contractor relationship of commission agents, it is necessary to ascertain whether the commission being paid is salary or wages (subject to PAYE) or a schedular payment (subject to withholding from the gross commission). The question of whether remuneration is salary or  wages or a schedular payment depends on the nature of the relationship in the contract of employment. See ¶3-201 and ¶3-376. Law: IT07 sch 4, pt G  ¶3-400 Independent financial advisers The liability to deduct withholding tax is determined by whether a payment made to a financial adviser is “commission or remuneration” and whether those payments are made to “an insurance agent or sub-agent, or to a salesperson”. If there is a liability, the standard rate of tax to be deducted is 20% (if the contractor has not elected another rate and is not subject to a special or prescribed rate (see ¶3-044)). Withholding tax does not have to be deducted if the individual financial adviser derives the commission through a company or holds an exemption certificate. See ¶3-044. Law: IT07 sch 4, pt G  ¶3-406 Real estate salespersons Real estate salespersons may be treated as independent contractors. See s 51 of the Real Estate Agents Act 2008. This applies if the real estate agent and the salesperson expressly agree that the relationship between them is that of employer and independent contractor. Once the employer–independent contractor relationship has been expressly acknowledged, salespersons will be regarded as independent contractors and will be permitted to deduct expenses incurred in deriving their income as real estate salespersons. Salespersons who are required to register for GST (gross commissions expected to exceed $60,000 in the 12-month period from that date) must do so. Others may voluntarily register for GST (see ¶32-148). Law: IT07 sch 4, pt G; REA s 51  EMPLOYEE ALLOWANCES ¶3-420 Accommodation or accommodation allowance provided The market value of accommodation, or an accommodation allowance, provided to a person in connection with employment, is employment income and is to be included within the recipient’s income. Section CE 1(2) defines accommodation as meaning board or lodging, or the use of a house or living premises, or the use of part of a house or living premises. Thus, the provision of accommodation or an allowance for accommodation (other than an amount that falls within one of the exempt allowances — see ¶3-425) is taxable in the hands of an employee. Under s RD 6(2) the value of the benefit is treated as accruing from day to day and should be included in the employee’s salary or wages for the pay period prior to making a PAYE deduction. Exceptions from “accommodation” Four exceptions to the accommodation definition allow for situations involving shift work or remote workplaces. If these types of accommodation are provided, no taxable income will arise for the employee. These exceptions cover: ▪ a berth, room, or other lodging provided on mobile workplaces, such as ships, trucks or oil rigs ▪ a station in Antarctica ▪ a room or lodging provided for shift workers, such as firefighters, ambulance staff and caregivers, when they are periodically required to sleep at their workplace, and the accommodation is provided only for the duration of the performance of their duties, and ▪ accommodation provided at remote locations outside New Zealand where the nature of the work means an employee is  required to be at the location for a period but also absent for a period, for example, miners in Australia who are expected to fly in and out. In addition, other types of excluded accommodation may be added by Order in Council. The definition of employer is extended to include any employer who provides accommodation, whether they are New Zealand tax resident or not, ensuring that accommodation provided by non-residents is not inadvertently excluded. Determining taxable value of accommodation The taxable amount is reduced by the amount (if any) paid by the employee. Example 1: Market value of accommodation Less rent paid Value to be added to wages and taxed  $250 per week $100 per week $150 per week  If the employee paid no rent, the value to be taxed would be $250 per week.  Where a cash allowance is paid to an employee instead, the allowance will be taxable under s CE 1(1)(a) and subject to PAYE under ss RA 5 and RD 3. Section CX 28 operates to exclude accommodation benefits provided to employees from fringe benefit tax. Where an employer provides accommodation, the taxable value of the benefit is the market value of the accommodation. Adjustments are made when a person contributes to their occupation of the accommodation (such as by paying rent), when employees share accommodation, and where part of the accommodation is used for work purposes. Where an allowance or reimbursement is made, the taxable value is equal to the amount of the allowance paid and the taxable value of the benefit can be adjusted for a contribution by the  employee or the use of part of the accommodation for work purposes. When an apportionment of the taxable value is made between employees who share accommodation, the taxable amount is either: ▪ apportioned equally between the employees, or ▪ if the employer and employees agree, apportioned between the employees on some other reasonable basis, such as one employee having a larger room. To qualify for an adjustment when part of the accommodation is used for work purposes, a clearly identifiable part of the accommodation needs to be used “wholly or mainly” for work purposes related to the employee’s employment or service. It does not need to be used solely for work purposes, but it must at least be used predominantly for work purposes. Any non-work-related use must be temporary or sporadic, or otherwise minor. The deduction is determined by apportioning between the business and private use. Special rules determine the taxable value of accommodation provided overseas, accommodation provided to ministers of religion and accommodation provided to defence personnel. Commissioner’s statements CS 16/02 — Determining market rental value of employer-provided accommodation In November 2016, the Commissioner released a Commissioner’s statement, CS 16/02, “Determining ‘Market Rental Value’ of Employer-Provided Accommodation”, which provides guidance to assist taxpayers in estimating the likely market rental value of employer-provided accommodation. The statement provides that absolute accuracy is not expected, but it is expected that a reasonable and appropriate process is followed when estimating the market rental value. It is also expected that the process that is followed, and the factors that were taken into account, will be documented and available for review. Where the process that was followed is able to be demonstrated as reasonable in the  circumstances, the actual valuation is unlikely to be questioned and shortfall penalties would not arise. The Commissioner considers that market rental value refers to the periodic rental that would be paid if similar accommodation in a comparable location, subject to similar restrictions or conditions relating to the tenancy, was rented on an arm’s length basis between non-associated parties. The Commissioner also considers that the amount actually paid to a third party as consideration under an arm’s length rental arrangement is the “market rental value” of the accommodation.  The statement provides that relevant matters to take into account include: ▪ The location of the accommodation, taking into account aspects such as its desirability, access to amenities (such as transport, shopping, etc), relative building values and security. ▪ The specific functional characteristics of the particular accommodation, such as the number of bedrooms, overall size, availability of parking, laundry facilities, etc, and the quality of the build. ▪ The overall, relative, condition of the accommodation, including whether it is rundown or, conversely, a luxury or high quality dwelling. ▪ The ease of travel to and from places of work, schools, shopping, etc, including the availability of public transport. ▪ Restrictions on use of the accommodation, or access to it, where such restrictions substantially inhibit the rights of use that would normally be available to a lessee. The Commissioner considers it unlikely that minor, or reasonable, restrictions, such as in respect of pets or smoking, would have a more than de minimis effect on the market rental value of accommodation, if at all. The Commissioner’s view is that contractual or employment-related matters will not have an effect on the market rental value of the accommodation. Rather, they are personal to the employee and, therefore, such matters would not apply to any arm’s length transaction. As a result, such matters cannot be taken into account when estimating the market rental value of accommodation provided to employees. In addition, it is not relevant, when estimating a market rental value, that there may not be an actual arm’s length market for specific accommodation, for example, where the accommodation that is made available to the employee is not, and never will be, available to members of the general public. This may arise for such reasons as a concern over security, or because the accommodation is intrinsic to the employment relationship.  The statement also contains a number of examples. CS 18/01 — Determining market rental value of employer-provided accommodation — boarding schools In August 2018, the Commissioner released a supplementary statement, CS 18/01, “Determining ‘Market Rental Value’ of EmployerProvided Accommodation — Boarding Schools”, which sets out a concessionary treatment for on-site accommodation provided to employees of boarding schools. While the above CS 16/02 applies, it is recognised in CS 18/01 that on-site boarding school accommodation, compared to comparable off-site accommodation, is likely to be subject to reduced market value that is not readily quantifiable due to unique restrictions and expectations that would apply to any tenant. For example, because the dwelling is within a school, the tenancy agreement may restrict smoking or drinking, or the ability to receive guests or visitors. Therefore, CS 18/01 sets out what the Commissioner will accept as an appropriate reduction of the market rental value that would otherwise apply. The statement provides that the applicable arm’s length market rental value must be established. That market rental value can then be reduced by the amount specified in the following table: Accommodation type  Reduction  Off-site accommodation — not on or adjacent to school grounds, and sufficiently separate from the school grounds as to not be readily associated with the school.  No reduction  On-site accommodation — separate (within school grounds but with direct off-site access, or immediately adjacent to school grounds).  20% of the market rental value  On-site accommodation — separate (within school grounds but without direct off-site access and not physically attached to student accommodation).  35% of the market rental value  On-site accommodation — adjoined to  40% of the market  student accommodation (separate access — not through student accommodation).  rental value  On-site accommodation — embedded within 50% of the market the student accommodation (no separate rental value access — only access via student accommodation). Accommodation provided to employees working overseas In the case of accommodation provided overseas (including an accommodation allowance or amount paid for or towards accommodation when the amount of the allowance or payment is the actual cost to the employee of the accommodation or a reasonable estimate of the likely expenditure), the value of the accommodation is an amount equal to the relevant market rental value of accommodation in New Zealand. The relevant market rental value is determined taking into account: ▪ the location where the person would be likely to work for their employer in New Zealand, and ▪ the equivalent accommodation in New Zealand that the person would be likely to occupy, and ▪ the average or median market rental value in the vicinity of the location referred to in the first bullet point above (unless that location is uncertain, in which case the average or median market rental value for the whole of New Zealand will be used). Example 2: Jill is seconded by her employer to Paris for two years and is provided with a flat for her secondment. Her employer pays rent equivalent to $95,000 a year. Jill would normally work in Auckland, when she is working in New Zealand, and would live in a one-bedroom apartment in Parnell, where an average rental value would be $26,000. Jill will pay tax on an accommodation benefit of $26,000.  Note that if the value of the overseas accommodation is less than the New Zealand equivalent market rental value, the overseas value must be used.  Accommodation provided to Defence Force personnel Special rules apply for accommodation provided to members of the defence forces. The market rental value will be equal to the lesser of: ▪ the market rental value for the accommodation, and ▪ the market rent payable for the national New Zealand Defence Force benchmark property for the type of accommodation provided to the person, less the discount applying to the type of accommodation. The Commissioner and the Chief of the Defence Force, in consultation with a registered valuer, must determine: ▪ the number and location of national benchmark properties ▪ the types of accommodation represented by the benchmark properties ▪ a market rental value for each type of accommodation in the benchmark properties, and ▪ a discount applying to each type of accommodation in the benchmark properties. Any such determination will have to be reviewed every three years. Accommodation provided to ministers of religion The assessable income of a member of the clergy includes their gross salary and the market value of housing provided. Historically, the taxable value of housing supplied to clergy was calculated at one-tenth of stipend (basic salary). Special valuation rules now apply to accommodation provided to ministers of religion. The amount of income in relation to employerprovided accommodation is calculated under the following formula: remuneration × (1 − adjustment) + excess rental where:  remuneration is 10% of the remuneration that the person receives for the income year for the performance of their duties as a minister (excluding the value of the accommodation) adjustment is the part of the value of the accommodation that is apportioned to work-related use, expressed as a decimal fraction of the total value of the accommodation. To be eligible for apportionment, the minister must use the relevant part wholly or mainly for work purposes. If more than one minister lives in the accommodation, the adjustment is apportioned equally between them excess rental is the amount (not being less than zero) that is the difference between: □ the market rental value for the accommodation provided for the income year, and □ the market rental value of accommodation that is reasonably commensurate with the duties of the person as a minister and for the location in which they perform their duties for the income year. If the accommodation is provided for only part of the year, the calculations of the value are done with reference to that part of the year. Inland Revenue has stated that the requirement that a minister’s church-provided accommodation is used as an integral part of performing the minister’s duties refers to the expectation underlying a minister’s pastoral duties that some parishioners might visit their home, irrespective of whether this happens in practice. There is no intention that ministers need to measure such use. A minister of religion is defined for these purposes in s CE 1E(6). Note that the definition specifically excludes a member of a religious society or order who is covered by the exemption in s CW 25 for board and lodgings provided to such a member who is not paid for their services (see ¶5-598). ▸Note: Draft operational statement  In December 2020, Inland Revenue released a draft Operational Statement, ED0227, “Income tax treatment of accommodation provided to employees”. The draft item deals with the tax treatment of employerprovided accommodation or accommodation allowances and how to calculate any tax liability. It considers what falls within the definition of “accommodation” and what is excluded, as well as the various exemptions that may apply. The draft statement then considers the rules relating to the valuation of the accommodation subject to tax. The draft statement contains two flowcharts to help taxpayers determine whether the employer has provided accommodation that is excluded and whether the accommodation is exempt. It also contains a number of examples illustrating the outcomes in different scenarios. Law: IT07 ss CD 32(2), CE 1, CE 1B, CE 1C, CE 1D, CE 1E, CW 17B, CX 28, RD 5(8), RD 6(2)  ¶3-425 Accommodation or allowance provided — exempt income Out-of-town secondments and projects Under ss CW 16B and CW 16C, accommodation and accommodation payments are exempt when an employee is required to work at a different work location that is not within reasonable daily travelling distance from the employee’s home, provided certain maximum time periods are not exceeded (see below). For the exemption to apply, the employee must be required to work at a distant workplace on an out-oftown secondment or a project of limited duration, and the period of employment must be a period of continuous work. This exemption applies when the employer provides accommodation or incurs expenditure on the employee’s accommodation for a period that falls within the relevant time limits. An employer may make a reasonable estimate of the expenditure likely to be incurred on an employee’s accommodation. It also applies when the employer incurs expenditure on the employee’s accommodation for necessary travel to and from the distant workplace. The exemption does not apply when the accommodation benefit is provided as a substitute for salary or wages. There is also an explicit  anti-avoidance rule to prevent behaviour intended simply to restart the respective time limit. The exemption only applies if, at the start of the period, the employer’s expectation of the duration of the secondment or the employee’s role on the project does not exceed the relevant time periods. If an employer expects a secondment or role on a project to last more than the relevant time period at the start but it later turns out that it will be for less than that period, the past employer-provided accommodation or allowances will remain taxable. Any accommodation or allowances paid from the time that the expectation is revised will be tax free. Conversely, if an employer expects that a secondment or role on a project will last for no more than the relevant period at the start but, part way through, it is expected that it will last for more than that period, any employer-provided accommodation or allowances will become taxable from the time that the expectation is revised. The point in time at which an expectation is treated as having changed is when the employer has a firm expectation that the secondment or role on the project will be shorter or longer than initially expected. This may be evidenced by a modification of the employee’s contract or by other documentation, such as board minutes, planning documents, correspondence with the third party for whom the employer is carrying out the capital project, etc. Residence and reasonable daily travelling distance To qualify for the exemption, an employee must be moving to a workplace that is not within reasonable daily travelling distance of their residence. “Residence” and “reasonable daily travelling distance” are not defined. Inland Revenue has stated that “residence” refers to the employee’s home immediately before the secondment or role on the project. The distance test is assessed for that residence. The concept of “reasonable daily travelling distance” also appears in s CW 17B (see ¶3-446). Following the introduction of that provision, guidance on the meaning of the term was published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 9, December 2009, at 6. Inland Revenue has stated that this guidance is also applicable to the accommodation exemptions. Out-of-town secondment  To be an out-of-town secondment, the employer must expect, at the start of the secondment, that it will not last more than two years. The exemption applies for the period that starts on the date the employee begins to work at a distant workplace, and ends on the earliest of the following dates: ▪ two years from the date they began work at the distant workplace ▪ the date the out-of-town secondment ends ▪ the date the employee receives an exempt work-related relocation payment under s CW 17B for the costs associated with settling the purchase of a new home ▪ the date on which the employer’s expectation regarding the length of the secondment changes and the total period is expected to exceed two years. Example 1: Zoe works for an engineering firm in Auckland. Her employer sends her to the firm’s Nelson office on 1 April 2015 on a secondment that is expected to last three years. Zoe is provided with an apartment in Nelson that the firm pays for. After 18 months, the firm wants Zoe to return to the Auckland office at the end of two years rather than stay for the full three years. It continues to provide Zoe with accommodation for the remaining six months. The accommodation provided to Zoe for the first 18 months will remain taxable to Zoe. However, the accommodation provided for the last six months will be tax free.  Project of limited duration A project of limited duration means a particular work project: ▪ whose principal purpose is to create, build, develop, restore, replace or demolish a capital asset ▪ that is carried out under a contract between the employer (the contractor) and non-associated persons, and ▪ where the engagement of the employee of the contractor at the distant workplace: □ has clear start and end dates at the outset  □ involves work that (apart from incidental activities) is undertaken solely for the purposes of the project, and □ in the contractor’s expectation at the start of the project, will last for a period of no more than three years. Thus, the maximum exemption for an employee who is required to work at a distant work place on a project of limited duration is extended to three years. Note that the duration of the project may be longer than three years, as the test is based on the time the employee is involved in the project, rather than the length of the project. Example 2: Martin is seconded to work on a dam construction project in the lower South Island. Martin’s employer sets up an accommodation facility to house its employees in the remote location. The dam project is expected to take around five years to complete. However, Martin’s employer only expects Martin to be working on the project for the first two and a half years. Martin is working on a project involving the creation of a capital asset, so the three-year upper time limit applies. His employer expects him to be working at the distant workplace for less than three years, so the value of the accommodation provided is exempt.  The exemption will end on the earliest of the following dates: ▪ three years from the date they began work on the project at the distant workplace ▪ the date the employee’s participation in the project at the distant workplace ends ▪ the date the employee receives an exempt work-related relocation payment under s CW 17B for the costs associated with settling the purchase of a new home ▪ the date on which the employer’s expectation regarding the employee’s involvement in the project changes and the total period is expected to exceed three years. Canterbury earthquake recovery projects  For employees who move to work on Canterbury earthquake recovery projects, the period of exemption will depend upon the timing of the move. The following periods will apply based on when the employees start work: ▪ five years when they start work between 4 September 2010 and 31 March 2015 ▪ four years when they start work between 1 April 2015 and 31 March 2016 ▪ three years when they start work between 1 April 2016 and 31 March 2019. The normal three-year rule will apply from 1 April 2019. Exceptional circumstances A time limit will not apply if exceptional circumstances arise beyond the control of the employer and employee that require the employee to remain at the distant workplace after the period expires. Examples are a natural disaster or medical emergency. However, an extension of time must be limited to the period for which the employee is unable, due to the exceptional circumstances, to leave the distant workplace. New employees The exemptions described above only apply to new employees in specific instances. The three-year exemption for limited duration work on capital projects applies to new employees, subject to the same conditions as existing employees. The two-year exemption for an out-of-town secondment will only apply to new employees when: ▪ an employee is hired to work permanently in a non-distant workplace but is then sent temporarily to work at a distant workplace ▪ an employee is seconded to another person with whom the employer has a continuing commercial affiliation or working  relationship for a period that is expected to be less than two years and at a distant workplace. Meetings, conferences and training courses Under s CW 16D, employer-provided accommodation or accommodation payments will also be exempt to an employee where the employee is required to stay away from their home overnight in the course of attending a work-related meeting, conference or training course. The overnight stay does not have to be at a distant location. The exemption also extends to any accommodation for necessary travel in connection with the performance of their duties for the period of their attendance. This means that if a stopover is required in travelling to or from the location, accommodation at that stopover will also be exempt. The exemption does not apply if the accommodation is a substitute for salary or wages that an employee might otherwise have received. Multiple workplaces Under s CW 16F, an ongoing exemption applies to accommodation and accommodation payments where an employee is required to work on an ongoing basis at more than one workplace and one or more of those workplaces is a distant workplace (for example, a manager who is responsible for two offices in two different cities, one of which is more than a reasonable travelling distance away from their residence). Inland Revenue has stated that the multiple workplace rule can also apply when an employee is sent on a short-term business trip to another location. In those circumstances, the employee will continue to have ongoing duties at their normal place of work while they are working at the other working location during the business trip. The exemption does not apply when one of the workplaces is a home office. It also does not apply if the accommodation is a substitute for salary or wages that an employee might have otherwise received. ▸Note: In December 2020, Inland Revenue released a draft Operational Statement, ED0227, “Income tax treatment of accommodation provided to employees”. See further at ¶3-420.  Law: IT07 ss CE 1(2), CW 16B, CW 16C, CW 16D, CW 16E, CW 16F, CZ 29, CZ 30  ¶3-430 Clothing allowance for distinctive work clothing Generally, a clothing allowance paid to an employee for the purpose of purchasing conventional clothing is taxable to the employee and subject to PAYE. However, case law has established that if the allowance is to purchase special clothing that the employee must wear to perform his or her employment duties, the allowance is not taxable. For example, an allowance paid to a farm employee to purchase gumboots and protective overalls is not taxable to the employee, provided the allowance paid is reasonable. When an employer directly provides and/or maintains work-related clothing instead of paying an allowance, rather than relying on case law, the fringe benefit tax rules specifically include a distinctive work clothing exemption (see s CX 30 and ¶21-634). To provide consistency in this area, it has been clarified that allowances paid to employees to cover the cost of buying and maintaining “distinctive work clothing” constitute exempt income of the employee. “Distinctive work clothing” for these purposes adopts the definition in s CX 30(2), being clothing, including a single item of clothing, that: ▪ is worn by an employee as, or as part of, a uniform that can be identified with the employer □ through the permanent and prominent display of a name, logo or other identification the employer regularly uses, or □ because the colour scheme, pattern or style is readily associated with the employer ▪ is worn in the course, or as an incident, of employment, and ▪ is not clothing employees would normally wear for private purposes. The exemption also covers allowances paid to uniformed personnel to cover the cost of plain clothes where the employee is required to wear  plain clothes in the course of performing their employment duties and the plain clothes allowance was in place as at 1 July 2013. Strict requirements must be met for the plain clothes allowance to apply: ▪ the employer must provide a uniform to its employees ▪ despite the provision of a uniform, the employer requires the employee to wear plain clothes as part of their employment duties ▪ the plain clothes allowance or payment was in place and part of the general terms and conditions of employment as at 1 July 2013 ▪ historically, the plain clothes allowance was part of a larger plain clothes amount the employer paid to employees, the balance being a taxable amount that was subsequently included in the taxable salary of employees receiving the plain clothes amount, under the general terms and conditions of employment, and ▪ the employment terms and conditions continue to provide for a plain clothes allowance. Law: IT07 ss CE 1, CW 17CC  ¶3-435 Criteria for exempt reimbursing allowance From time to time, an employer may reimburse or pay a reimbursing allowance to an employee for an expense incurred by the employee in connection with the employee’s employment. The payment may be a regular payment or a one-off payment. All reimbursements and allowances paid to an employee are taxable and subject to PAYE unless it is specifically exempt. Thus, the tax treatment of that payment in the employee’s hands depends on whether the amount paid qualifies as exempt income under s CW 17. Section CW 17 treats as exempt income amounts paid by an employer in connection with an employee’s employment or service when the amount is: ▪ a payment of expenditure on account of an employee, or ▪ an amount reimbursing the employee for expenditure, and  ▪ where, in either case, if it were not for the employment limitation, the expenditure would be an allowable deduction to the employee. The “employment limitation” refers to the prohibition on salary and wage earners from claiming deductions for expenditure incurred in deriving employment income. See ¶1-250. Therefore, to determine whether a reimbursing allowance is “tax-free”, the expenditure incurred by the employee must be deductible under ordinary principles, ie the expenditure must satisfy the nexus test and not be of a private or domestic nature, or a capital nature. Nexus test Greater clarity has been added about when an expense is an allowable deduction in deriving employment income, ie when it satisfies the “nexus test”. Section CW 17(2B) provides that expenditure is only treated as incurred, or an amount paid, in connection with an employee’s employment or service if: ▪ it is incurred or the amount paid because the employee is performing an obligation required by their employment or service ▪ the employee earns income through the performance of the obligation, and ▪ the expenditure is necessary in the performance of the obligation. Determination Under s CW 17(2C) and (2D), the Commissioner is also able to issue a determination for a payment made to a wide group or class of employees. The Commissioner is able to determine the extent to which on average the amount is exempt income, by setting a percentage that represents the extent to which the payment for the particular type of expense, based on a reasonable estimate, is taxable. The Commissioner has to be satisfied that the payment not only affects a large group or class of employees but also that the average private or capital benefit likely to be received is hard to measure and that the payment is not paid as a substitute for salary or wages. Any such  determination is binding on the Commissioner but not the taxpayer, meaning it acts as a safe harbour for taxpayers. Determination EE001 In December 2019, Inland Revenue released Determination EE001: Employee use of telecommunications tools and usage plans in their employment (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 7). The item provides employers with the option of applying certain percentages to make an allocation between business use and private use for usage plans related to telecommunications tools, provided the requirements set out in the determination are met and the employer considers that it is preferable not to commit resources to establishing the actual percentage. The determination applies to three types of situations: Class A, Class B and the De Minimis Class. All three must satisfy the following: ▪ an employer enters into an arrangement with the employee whereby the employee will provide their own telecommunications tools and usage plan, or the arrangement involves the employee using their own usage plan, and ▪ the employee incurs the cost of the telecommunications tools and the usage plan or the cost of the usage plan alone and there is reimbursement, or ▪ a reimbursing allowance represents a reasonable estimate of the likely expenditure to be incurred by the employee. In addition, to fall within Class A (principally business use), the telecommunications tools and usage plan must be principally used by the employee in their employment, and the employee also uses the tools and usage plan or usage plan alone for private use. To be Class B (principally private use), the employee is required to use telecommunications tools and usage plan in their employment based on a business reason and also uses the tools and usage plan or usage plan alone for private use. In both cases there may also be an amount relating to depreciation loss.  For Class A cases, employers can treat 75% of the amount paid (total bill amount) either by reimbursement or by a reimbursing allowance for usage plans, as exempt income of the employee. The extent to which the payment is taxable is 25%. If the employer pays 75% of the total bill as a reimbursing allowance or reimbursement, then the whole amount paid is exempt. For Class B cases, employers can treat 25% of the amount paid either by reimbursement or by a reimbursing allowance for usage plans as exempt income of the employee. The extent to which the payment is taxable is 75%. If the employer pays 25% of the total bill as a reimbursing allowance or reimbursement, then the whole amount paid is exempt. In both cases, depreciation loss is calculated using the Commissioner’s rates for the items. The De Minimis Class also covers the situation where the employee is required to use telecommunications tools and a usage plan in their employment based on a business reason and also uses the tools and usage plan for private use. However, to fall within this class there must be a payment of no more than $5 per week per employee, amounting to no more than $265 per year per employee, as a reimbursement or a reimbursing allowance in relation to the use of telecommunications tools and a usage plan or the cost of the usage plan alone. This amount can be treated as exempt income of the employee. This is in circumstances where the employee uses telecommunications tools in employment and incurs expenditure. The determination contains a flowchart for determining whether, and how, it applies, as well as a number of examples that explain the application of the determination. Determination EE002 In April 2020, Inland Revenue released Determination EE002: Payments to employees for working from home costs during the COVID-19 pandemic (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 5, June 2020 at 16). The determination is a temporary response to the COVID-19 pandemic and applies to payments made for the period from 17 March 2020 to 17 September 2020. The treatment it provides depends on an employee continuing to work from home, in a more than minor way, as  a result of COVID-19. However, note the variation and extension of the determination beyond 17 September 2020 for all employees working from home, regardless of the COVID-19 pandemic, by Determinations EE002A and EE002B, discussed below. As a result of potential difficulties in establishing or estimating the amount of expenditure incurred by employees and the extent to which that expenditure is private in nature, the determination provides safe harbour amounts of exempt income for payments made to employees to reimburse costs incurred by the employees as a result of the employees working from home during the pandemic. Taxpayers may still choose not to apply the determination and to calculate tax-free allowance and reimbursement amounts under s CW 17 based on their own reasonable estimates or actual employee costs. Determination EE002 applies to working from home costs not already covered by Determination EE001 (see above). Determination EE002 can be relied on in addition to Determination EE001. For this determination to apply: ▪ An employer must make a payment to an employee. ▪ The payment must be for expenditure or a loss incurred (or likely to be incurred) by the employee. ▪ The expenditure or loss must be incurred by the employee in deriving their employment income and not be private or capital in nature (the capital limitation does not apply to an amount of depreciation loss). ▪ The payment must be made because the employee is doing their job and the employee must be deriving employment income from performing their job. ▪ The expenditure or loss must be necessary in the performance of the employee’s job. ▪ The expenditure or loss must be incurred by the employee as a result of the employee being required to work from home because of the COVID-19 pandemic.  An employee can work partly from home and partly outside the home, provided the home-based work is more than minor. Exclusions The determination does not apply to: ▪ expenditure on account of an employee ▪ any payments made for a period after an employee ceases to work from home ▪ an amount paid under a salary sacrifice arrangement, or ▪ a payment made to an employee to compensate the employee for the conditions of their service. Weekly threshold The determination provides that, where an allowance is paid, up to $15 per week of the amount paid can be treated as exempt income of the employee. The same treatment can be applied to an equivalent amount paid for a different time period, eg $30 per fortnight or $65 per month. This amount is in recognition of general expenditure (eg additional heating costs) that an affected employee may incur when working from home, other than: ▪ depreciation loss, which is separately addressed (see below), and ▪ an expenditure or loss covered by Determination EE001. Cost of furniture and equipment In recognition that an employee might incur a depreciation loss on home office furniture or equipment, which the employee would be able to claim as a deduction except for the employment limitation, the determination provides employers with two options — the safe harbour option and the reimbursement option. Safe harbour option An employer can treat up to $400 of an amount paid to an employee for furniture and equipment costs as exempt income. If this option is  chosen, an employer cannot treat any other allowance or reimbursement payment for furniture or equipment as exempt income. Reimbursement option An amount paid by an employer to an affected employee will be exempt income of an employee if: ▪ the amount is for furniture or equipment purchased by the employee, and ▪ the amount is equal to or less than the deduction that the employee could have for depreciation loss on the asset (or the cost of the asset, in the case of a low-value asset) for the income year, except for the employment limitation. The deduction the employee could have for an asset depends on the extent to which the employee uses the asset for their employment. Thus, the amount that can be paid as exempt income will be equal to a proportion of the depreciation loss on the asset (or a proportion of the cost of the asset in the case of a low-value asset). Under s CW 17, where there is evidence that an asset will be used exclusively for employment purposes, 100% of the depreciation loss on the asset (the cost of the asset, in the case of a low-value asset) can be paid as exempt income of the employee. The determination adds the following: ▪ For an employee who uses an asset principally for their employment, up to 75% of the depreciation loss on the asset (the cost of the asset, in the case of a low-value asset) can be paid as exempt income of the employee. ▪ For an employee who does not use an asset principally for their employment, up to 25% of the depreciation loss on the asset (the cost of the asset, in the case of a low-value asset) can be paid as exempt income of the employee. The determination provides that a written statement (an email or expense claim application is sufficient) from an employee to their employer that the employee intends to use an asset for their  employment, and whether principally or not, will be sufficient to establish such use. Note that for depreciation losses on telecommunications devices, employers cannot apply the reimbursement option in Determination EE002 in addition to the treatment available in Determination EE001. Determinations EE002A and EE002B The Commissioner is considering issuing a public statement dealing with the tax implications of having employees working from home as a “new way of working”, rather than being limited to the enforced way of working during a COVID-19 lockdown period. As this statement would not be ready before 17 September 2020, the expiry date of Determination EE002, the Commissioner’s view was that taxpayers should be able to continue applying the approach in that determination until 17 March 2021. Consequently, in August 2020, Inland Revenue released Determination EE002A: Variation to Determination EE002 – Payments to employees for working from home costs during the COVID-19 pandemic (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 8, September 2020 at 21). Determination EE002A extended the application of Determination EE002 by six months to apply to payments made by employers from 18 September 2020 to 17 March 2021. In addition, Determination EE002A removed all references to the requirement that the employee is working from home as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, for the extended period of application of Determination EE002, the determination applies to any employee that works from home regardless of whether they do so as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Note that, with the exception of these variations, the other requirements of Determination EE002