-700). Note that the payments are not exempt under the income tax exemption for diplomatic and consular officers (see ¶5-685). Law: IT07 ss CF 1(1)(g), (2), YA 1  ¶5-317 Taxation of interests in foreign superannuation schemes Before 1 April 2014, the rules for taxing New Zealand residents on their foreign superannuation were complex and difficult to understand. Some superannuation interests were subject to tax on accrual under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules and others depended on the legal structure of the foreign scheme, eg whether it was a company or trust. With effect from 1 April 2014, a cohesive set of rules applies for interests in, and income from, foreign superannuation schemes.  The rules apply to interests in a foreign superannuation scheme that are not FIF superannuation interests. A FIF superannuation interest is an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme where either the person has applied the FIF rules to the interest in a return filed before 20 May 2013 and continues to apply those rules, or the interest was acquired when the person was resident in New Zealand. FIF superannuation interests remain subject to the FIF rules after 1 April 2014. Interests in foreign superannuation schemes that are not FIF superannuation interests, and are therefore subject to the new rules, are excluded from the FIF rules. See ¶26-125. Note that the situation when a New Zealand resident person acquires an interest when they are non-resident or treated under a double tax agreement as being resident in another country was clarified by retrospective legislation. The new rules, rather than the FIF rules, apply in that situation. In addition, the assessable period begins when the person first becomes New Zealand resident and is not treated under any double tax agreement as resident in a foreign country. It was also clarified that where a person first acquires an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme while non-resident and continues to contribute to the scheme while New Zealand resident, the person is taxed under the foreign superannuation rules, rather than the FIF rules, in relation to the whole interest (ie there is no need to apportion their interest in the scheme between the two sets of rules). These clarifications apply from 1 April 2014, the start date of the new rules. The amendments also introduced the concept of a “low-value FIF superannuation interest”. Under the FIF rules, a person has no FIF income or loss if the total cost of their interests in FIFs is less than $50,000. An individual could therefore own a foreign superannuation interest they acquired while they were a New Zealand tax resident and be below the $50,000 FIF threshold, so that neither the new rules for foreign superannuation interests nor the FIF rules would apply to them. They would therefore potentially be in the same situation that the new rules were enacted to provide for. The change for “low-value FIF superannuation interests” addresses this concern by ensuring that the schedule method in the foreign  superannuation rules applies to lump-sum withdrawals (and transfers to New Zealand or Australian superannuation schemes) made from a foreign superannuation interest that was acquired while a taxpayer was a New Zealand resident, where the taxpayer has less than $50,000 of FIF interests. The amendments for “low-value FIF superannuation interests” apply from 1 April 2015. In general, therefore, provided the interest in the foreign superannuation scheme was acquired when the person was nonresident, the interest is subject to the rules from 1 April 2014. The rules in s CF 3 apply when a New Zealand resident derives a benefit from an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme (defined as a “foreign superannuation withdrawal”), unless that benefit is a pension or annuity. Section CF 3(2) treats that foreign superannuation withdrawal as income of the person if it is in the form of: ▪ an amount (ie cash withdrawal or other lump sum) derived as a member or beneficiary of the scheme ▪ a withdrawal and reinvestment (ie transfer) of an interest from a foreign superannuation scheme into a New Zealand superannuation scheme, including KiwiSaver ▪ a withdrawal and reinvestment (ie transfer) from a foreign superannuation scheme (outside Australia) to an Australian superannuation scheme, or ▪ a withdrawal and reinvestment as an interest of another person (ie a disposal or assignment). Rollover relief is available where a withdrawal and immediate reinvestment occurs as a result of a relationship break-up, or upon the death of the transferor, but only where the transferee is a New Zealand resident and the surviving or former spouse or partner of the transferor. Note that a consequential amendment was made to the rollover relief provisions to provide that both the transferor and the transferee will  need to be New Zealand residents and not treated as resident in a foreign country under any double tax agreements for roll-over relief to be provided. Transfers from one foreign scheme to another foreign non-Australian scheme will generally not be taxable. An exemption also applies for withdrawals in the first four years after a person becomes resident under s CW 28B. See further at ¶5-648. Schedule method After the four-year exemption period, a person’s tax liability on a withdrawal will generally be calculated using the “schedule method”, which provides that a particular fraction (based on how long the person has been a New Zealand resident before making the withdrawal) is applied to the withdrawal to determine the person’s taxable income. The applicable fraction is set out in sch 33. This method approximates the tax that would otherwise have been paid on accrual while the person was resident in New Zealand, in conjunction with an interest charge that recognises the payment of tax has been deferred. A person’s assessable withdrawal amount under the schedule method is calculated using the following formula provided in s CF 3(10): (super withdrawal − contributions left) × schedule year fraction where: super withdrawal is the amount of the foreign superannuation withdrawal (ie the lump sum) contributions left is a deduction for recognised contributions made for or on behalf of the person while the person is a New Zealand tax resident, provided the contributions satisfy all of the following conditions under s CF 3(19): □ at the time the contribution is made, the person must be a New Zealand resident and treated as such under all applicable double tax agreements  □ the contribution is made by the person or the person’s employer, or for the benefit of the person □ the contribution must be required by the rules of the scheme (ie not a voluntary contribution), and □ employer contributions must be subject to employer superannuation contribution tax or fringe benefit tax. In addition, a contribution may only be deducted once under the schedule method and, for a given lump sum, the amount of contributions deducted may not exceed the value of the lump sum in calculating the assessable withdrawal amount. Only recognised contributions made during the assessable period before the distribution time can be deducted. schedule year fraction is the appropriate fraction given in sch 33. The fraction to use is identified by calculating the number of income years that begin in the person’s assessable period, before the person receives the lump sum. This is the number of income years that begin after the person becomes a New Zealand tax resident and after their four-year exemption period ends. Where this number is zero, the fraction for year one is used. The effect of counting a person’s years of residence from the end of the exemption period is to treat them as being non-resident during the exemption period. Thus, gains that accrue during those four years are not clawed back and are not taxed under the schedule method. For an example, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 4, May 2014 at 22. Formula method An alternative method of calculating actual gains derived while the person is New Zealand resident — the “formula method” — is also available for amounts received from “foreign defined contribution schemes” where certain requirements are met. An interest factor is  applied to the value of the gains to compensate for the use-of-money benefit. To be eligible to use the formula method, the following requirements must be met: ▪ the scheme is a foreign defined contribution scheme (a foreign superannuation scheme that operates on the principle of allocating contributions to the scheme on a defined basis to individual members) ▪ the person has sufficient information about the value of the scheme and contributions made to apply the formula ▪ the person must not have received a withdrawal (other than a pension or annuity) before 1 April 2014 ▪ the person, or their spouse or partner if the person received the interest from them, must not have used the schedule method for the interest in the scheme, and ▪ the person must choose to use the formula method. Distributed gain The necessary calculations for the formula method begin with determining the distributed gain under s CF 3(12) as follows: (super withdrawal × calculated gains fraction) − other gains where: super withdrawal is the amount of the foreign superannuation withdrawal other gains is the total amount of distributed gain calculated under this formula for previous foreign superannuation withdrawals received in the assessable period before this lump sum distribution (If this is the first lump sum for the person in relation to that foreign superannuation interest, then other gains is equal to zero.)  calculated gains fraction is the greater of zero and the result given by the formula in s CF 3(14) as follows: (predistribution + withdrawals − value − contributions) ÷ predistribution where: □ predistribution is the value of the person’s interest in the scheme immediately before they made their foreign superannuation withdrawal □ withdrawals is the total amount of previous foreign superannuation withdrawals the person has received from their foreign superannuation scheme made during their assessable period before this current distribution □ value is the value of the person’s interest in the scheme at the beginning of their assessable period (thus, after any exemption period) □ contributions is the amount of recognised contributions under s CF 3(19) made to the scheme during the person’s assessable period before the distribution time. To be a recognised contribution the contribution must satisfy the requirements of s CF 3(19), discussed above under the schedule method. If the formula for the calculated gains fraction provides a negative result, the person must enter zero for the calculated gains fraction term in the formula for the distributed gain in s CF 3(12). The result is that losses cannot be offset against other income in the person’s income tax return. Once a person has calculated their calculated gains fraction and their distributed gain in relation to their lump sum, they are then required to calculate their assessable withdrawal amount. This calculates the appropriate amount of interest to be charged on the amount of taxable New Zealand gains to account for the deferral benefit that the person obtains by not paying tax on accrual. This interest is  calculated at the same rate as the average growth of the person’s superannuation interest over the number of years of New Zealand tax residence. Assessable withdrawal amount The assessable withdrawal amount is calculated as follows: gain × (grow rate − 1) × tax rate × (assessable years − 1) + gain where: gain is the amount of the distributed gain calculated under the formula in s CF 3(12) above tax rate is the tax rate referred to in row 1 of table 1 of sch 6, being the top prescribed investor rate for taxing investments in multi-rate portfolio investment entities assessable years is the greater of 1 and the number of tax years beginning in the assessable period and before the distribution time grow rate is determined under the formula in s CF 3(17), as follows: (accrued total ÷ value) (1 ÷ assessable years) where: □ accrued total is: — the sum of: the value of the interest in the scheme immediately before the distribution time, and the total amount of previous foreign superannuation withdrawals made during the assessable period before the distribution time, — reduced by the value of recognised contributions under s CF 3(19) made to the scheme before the distribution  time □ value is the value of the person’s interest in the scheme at the beginning of the assessable period □ assessable years is as above. The final result is the person’s assessable withdrawal amount, which is to be included as income in the person’s income tax return. For an example, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 4, May 2014 at 26. To the extent that the foreign superannuation withdrawal is not taxable under the relevant method in s CF 3, it will be exempt income under s CW 28C. See further at ¶5-648. Note also that if a person derives an amount as a foreign superannuation withdrawal from a company that is a foreign superannuation scheme, the amount is not a dividend (see ¶16-733). Transitional provision A special optional treatment was available for taxpayers who had withdrawn, or applied to withdraw, a lump sum from a foreign superannuation scheme between 1 January 2000 and 31 March 2014 and who did not comply with the tax rules that applied at the time. This included the transfer of funds from one foreign superannuation scheme to another superannuation scheme. Those taxpayers could choose to return 15% of all their omitted withdrawals in their return for their 2013–14 or 2014–15 income year. They then paid tax at their marginal rate on that amount. There was generally no use-of-money interest or late payment penalties charged if the 15% option was adopted. Where a taxpayer chose not to adopt the 15% option, they had to calculate their tax liability under the law that applied at the time of the withdrawal or transfer and may have been subject to penalties and interest on any overdue tax. Note that Inland Revenue indicated it considered the tax due was based only on the amount of omitted income and did not take into  account deductible items, such as fees, although it accepted that this interpretation was not free from doubt. For examples of how this provision worked, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 4, May 2014 at 32. Historic non-compliance with FIF rules When the FIF rules ceased to apply from 1 April 2014, any historic non-compliance under the FIF rules was overridden if the person used the formula or schedule method for lump-sum withdrawals and transfers made on or after 1 April 2014, if the person’s assessable period began before 1 April 2014. This is provided for in s CF 3(22) to ensure that the person was not double taxed. Note, however, s CF 3(22) only applies when a person receives foreign superannuation withdrawals. If there was historic FIF noncompliance, but the person did not receive any foreign superannuation withdrawals and only received a pension, there was no corresponding provision to override the FIF non-compliance. This problem applied to people who mistakenly included their pension income in their tax return before 1 April 2014 when they should have complied with the FIF rules, as well as those who started to receive a pension after 1 April 2014. To resolve this problem, s EZ 32G was introduced to override noncompliance under the FIF rules in two situations. The first is where the person derived no payments from their foreign superannuation interest before 1 April 2014 and receives only pension payments from 1 April 2014. The second situation is when the person received only pension payments from the foreign superannuation scheme before 1 April 2014 and included all of these pension payments in their income tax returns for the appropriate income years by the due date for each of those returns. Corresponding sections are also being introduced in the Income Tax Act 1994 and Income Tax Act 2004. Law: IT07 ss CF 3, CW 28B, CW 28C, CZ 21B, EZ 32G, YA 1, sch 33  ¶5-320 Income from remission of a specified suspensory loan An amount remitted to a person on a specified suspensory loan is income. Briefly, a specified suspensory loan is a loan granted by a public authority that is: ▪ granted to a person for a business carried on by that person, and ▪ designated by the public authority as a specified suspensory loan. A public authority means every department or instrument of the Executive Government of New Zealand and includes: ▪ the Public Trust ▪ the Māori Trustee ▪ the New Zealand Lottery Grants Board, the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives, the Ombudsman, the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, and the Parliamentary Service ▪ the Official Assignee, other than in their capacity as a trustee, and ▪ the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission, but does not include a mixed-ownership enterprise. The income derived is allocated equally over three income years: the income year of remission and the following two income years. Alternatively, the person may choose to allocate some or all of the amount remitted to one of the income years that is within the threeyear spreading period. If the person ceases to carry on the business for which the specified suspensory loan was granted, the income that is allocated to a later income year must be returned in the year that business ceased.  Law: IT07 ss CF 2, YA 1  Recoveries ¶5-330 Depreciation recovery income An amount of depreciation recovery income is income under s CG 1. See ¶13-300. Law: IT07 s CG 1  ¶5-340 Income — remission of expenditure or debt Remitted amounts A remission or cancellation of a person’s liability (in whole or in part) is income if: ▪ the person is allowed a deduction for a liability in an income year that is later remitted or cancelled ▪ the remission or cancellation is not a dividend, and ▪ the person is not required to calculate a base price adjustment. The income is allocated to the income year in which the remission or cancellation occurs. Briefly, for the purposes of the income provision, a liability is remitted or cancelled if: ▪ the person is discharged from a liability without fully adequate consideration ▪ the person is released from a liability under the Insolvency Act 2006, except by being discharged from bankruptcy or fully released from provable debts under Pt 5, other than subpart 1, of the Insolvency Act  ▪ the person is released from a liability under the Companies Act 1993 or the laws of a foreign country ▪ the person is released from a liability by a deed or agreement of composition with the person’s creditors, or ▪ a liability is irrecoverable or unenforceable through lapse of time. Group loss companies Section CG 2 does not apply to a group loss company if: ▪ the group loss company has previously made a tax loss available to another company in the same group of companies under the loss grouping rules, and ▪ the group loss company in the same group of companies as the group profit company has unsatisfied liabilities for deductible expenditure included in those past tax losses made available under the loss grouping rules, and ▪ the group loss company in the same group of companies is liquidated, or ▪ either the group profit company or the group loss company has left the group and for both cases, the group loss company is insolvent, in receivership or in liquidation at that time. Instead, ss CG 2C, CG 2D and CG 2E apply in those circumstances. These provisions confirm the long-standing policy that the grouping of tax under the loss grouping rules is contingent on the group loss company fully satisfying its liabilities relating to past deductible expenditure included in the group loss company’s tax losses. If the sections apply, the group profit company derives income equal to the amount of certain unsatisfied liabilities of the group loss company. Section CG 2C applies if the group loss company has been struck off the register of companies. Section CG 2D applies if the profit company and the group loss company are no longer part of the same group of companies and:  ▪ the group profit company has received the benefit of group tax losses from the group loss company, and ▪ at the time either company leaves the group, the group loss company is insolvent, in receivership or has been placed in liquidation (but not yet struck off the register of companies). Section CG 2E provides for the application of ss CG 2C and CG 2D in situations when loss companies have losses representing a combination of paid and unpaid expenditure and when they have apportioned losses to more than one group company. Bad debts recovered If a person receives an amount for a bad debt for which the person has been allowed a deduction, the amount received is income. Law: IT07 ss CG 2, CG 2C, CG 2D, CG 2E, CG 3  ¶5-342 Income — recovered expenditure or loss If a person is allowed a deduction for expenditure or loss and some or all of that expenditure or loss has been recovered, the amount recovered is income of the person to the extent of the deduction. This rule applies if the amount recovered is not income under any other provision of the Income Tax Act 2007. Further, this rule applies whether the recovery is obtained through insurance, indemnity or otherwise. The income is allocated to the later of: ▪ the income year in which expenditure or loss is incurred, or ▪ the income year in which the amount is recovered. Hole in the profits compensation The hole in the profits principle requires that compensation received for the loss of income be regarded as income. This taxation of compensation money has been supported on the ground that it takes its character from the income it replaces.  Example 1: Land purchased by a taxpayer for subdivision was compulsorily acquired. The compensation paid to the taxpayer was assessed to tax because the profits of the subdivision would have been taxed. The one replaced the other. See Duff v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,131 (CA). (A disposal for the purposes of the taxation of land transactions under subpart CB specifically includes compulsory acquisition. See ¶7025.)  See also IR Commrs v Newcastle Breweries Ltd (1926) 12 TC 927, KR Greenslade Ltd v C of IR (1986) 8 NZTC 5,197, FC of T v GKN Kwikform Services Pty Ltd 91 ATC 4336, Case S104 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,662 and Case T47 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,319. Law: IT07 s CG 4  ¶5-343 Income — recovered employer superannuation contributions If an employer is allowed a deduction for an employer’s superannuation contribution to a superannuation scheme for their employee’s benefit and the contribution is recovered or the employer receives a benefit from the superannuation scheme, the amount recovered or received is income of the employer to the extent of the deduction. The income is allocated to the income year in which the amount is recovered or received. Law: IT07 s CG 5  ¶5-344 Income — refund of expenditure A refund of expenditure previously allowed as a deduction from income may constitute income in the hands of the recipient. Example 1: A racing club received a refund of totalisator duty previously allowed as a deduction. The refund was of an income nature; it was intended to assist and supplement the club in conducting its racing activities. See Cromwell Jockey Club v C of IR (1954) 6 AITR 188.  Example 2: The assessment of amounts received by way of a refund does not apply when the payment received does not replace an earlier revenue outgoing. See John Anderson Ltd v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,029.  ¶5-345 Income — insurance, indemnity or compensation for interruption or impairment of business activities Section CG 5B was introduced to amend the timing of income from the proceeds of business interruption insurance in the wake of the Canterbury earthquakes, effective 4 September 2010. The section applies when a person receives an amount of insurance, indemnity or compensation for an interruption or impairment of business activities resulting from an event. The part of the insurance, indemnity or compensation attributable to income (the replaced income) that the person would have derived if not for the event is income of the person. Under s CG 5B(3), that income is allocated to the later of: ▪ the income year to which the replaced income relates ▪ the earlier of the income year in which the amount is received and the income year in which the amount is reasonably able to be estimated. Note that even before the legislation, New Zealand case law supported the view that a loss of profits insurance recovery should be attributed to the income year to which the recovered amount relates, rather than the year of receipt. See, for example, the Court of Appeal decision in Egmont Co-operative Dairies Ltd (in liq) v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,536. An amendment made in 2019 has clarified that a person who has been assigned the right to receive compensation proceeds from an interruption or impairment of business activities is taxed in the same  way that the assignor would have been taxed. This ensures loss of earnings insurance proceeds are taxable in all circumstances, including when the rights to receive these proceeds are assigned to another company. The amendment applies retrospectively from the beginning of the 2011–12 income year, subject to a savings provision to protect taxpayers who had taken a tax position on the basis of the former wording in the period ending on 26 June 2019. Law: IT07 s CG 5B  ¶5-346 Income — insurance, indemnity or compensation for trading stock Part of an amount of insurance, indemnity or compensation received for the loss or destruction of, or damage to: ▪ trading stock, or ▪ anything acquired, manufactured or produced for a purpose that is ancillary to a business of manufacturing or producing goods for sale or exchange is income if the person is allowed a deduction (not being a deduction for depreciation loss) in an income year for the cost of the asset. The income amount is the part of the receipt that is attributable to the asset and it is allocated to the income year in which it is received. For land or buildings damaged in the Canterbury earthquake, relief from immediate taxation of any insurance or compensation may be available under s CZ 25: see ¶7-450. Law: IT07 s CG 6  ¶5-348 Income — purchase and subsequent disposal of leased asset The lessee of plant who later acquires the plant and resells it at a profit, or an associated person of the lessee who acquires the asset and disposes of it for a consideration exceeding that for which that  person acquired it, may be taxed on the transaction. The amount to be included within the lessee’s income is the lesser of the profit made and the aggregate of the rent paid for the plant. Effectively, the deductions previously allowed are cancelled out. The leased asset may be any plant, machinery, motor vehicle, equipment or temporary building. The person must, of course, have been allowed a deduction for any rent paid in respect of the asset. If the leased asset has been acquired or sold or otherwise disposed of by the lessee or associated person together with other assets, the total consideration must be apportioned between the leased asset and the other assets in accordance with their market values. If the leased asset has been disposed of for a consideration that is less than its market value, the asset is deemed to have realised its market value. These principles apply irrespective of whether the lessee was required under the lease agreement to acquire the leased asset. Example: TP Ltd leased a truck for four years at an annual rental of $5,000. The company then acquired the truck for $15,000 and sold it for $25,000. The company’s income is the lesser of: $ profit on the trade-in ($25,000 − $15,000), or  10,000  lease deductions ($5,000 × 4)  20,000  Gross income  10,000  These provisions are designed to negate the benefit of the deductibility of lease payments when those payments are subsequently recouped by acquisition and resale of the asset at a profit. Different rules apply when the lease is one designated as a finance lease. See ¶6-700. Transfer of leased asset under relationship agreement  The recharacterisation provisions do not apply when the leased asset is transferred pursuant to a relationship agreement. This means that no tax liability is created for the transferor. A tax liability does, however, arise in the hands of the transferee when he or she subsequently disposes of the asset. The amount included in the transferee’s income is the amount by which the proceeds of sale exceeds the transfer value. For that purpose, the transfer value is the book value of the asset at the beginning of the tax year in which the asset is transferred or the cost price of the asset if the transferor acquired the asset in the same year it is transferred pursuant to the relationship agreement. If the transferee disposes of the leased asset without consideration or for less than its market value, the sale price is deemed to be the asset’s market price. There is a limit on the amount included in the transferee’s income. The amount included in income is the smaller of the excess calculated in the above manner and the total amount of the deductions allowed to the transferor in calculating his or her income. Profit made by lessor and passed back to lessee Some lease agreements provide that, upon termination of the lease, the leased asset will be sold by the lessor and the lessee will receive any ensuing profit or be responsible for the loss, as appropriate. As the lessee does not acquire title to the asset, the clawback rule in s FA 5 does not apply. In this situation, the profit is income of the lessee. See John Anderson Ltd v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,029. Law: IT07 ss CG 7, FA 5, FB 19  ¶5-352 Clawback of deductions for aborted or failed applications for patents, resource consents or plant variety rights With effect from the 2014–15 income year, where a deduction has been allowed under any of ss DB 19, DB 37 or DB 40BA for an aborted or failed application for a patent or grant of a resource consent or plant variety rights, those deductions are clawed back as  income if the taxpayer subsequently disposes of the abandoned application property or uses it in another application. See ¶10-750, ¶10-760 and ¶10-860. With effect from 1 April 2015 for the 2015–16 and later income years, s DB 37 has been extended to allow deductions for aborted or failed applications for design registration. As a consequence, s CG 7B has also been extended to claw back such deductions as income if the property is disposed of or used in another application. See ¶10-750. Law: IT07 s CG 7B  ¶5-354 Clawback of deductions for capitalised development expenditure With effect from 1 April 2015 for the 2015–16 and later income years, provisions allow a deduction for capitalised development expenditure on derecognised non-depreciable intangible assets. As part of these provisions, s CG 7C claws back as income such deductions where the intangible asset is disposed of or is rerecognised for financial reporting purposes. See ¶10-850. Law: IT07 s CG 7C  ¶5-356 Capital contributions treated as income A capital contribution, for the purposes of s CG 8, means an amount that: ▪ is paid by a person (the payer) to the recipient under an agreement between them ▪ is paid by the payer other than in their capacity of settlor, partner or shareholder of the recipient ▪ is not income of the recipient, ignoring ss CC 1B and CG 8 ▪ is expressly paid under the agreement as a contribution for capital contribution property, and  ▪ if the agreement is a contract of insurance, indemnity or compensation, is paid in relation to an interruption or impairment of business activities. Effectively a capital contribution is similar in nature to a subsidy for capital expenditure. Capital contribution property means: ▪ depreciable property owned or to be acquired ▪ a farming, horticultural, aquacultural or forestry improvement for which expenditure is or would be deductible under ss DO 4, DO 11, DO 12 or DO 13 ▪ a listed horticultural plant or land for which expenditure is or would be deductible under ss DO 5 or DO 6 ▪ a listed horticultural plant or land to the extent to which some but not all expenditure for replacement plants is deductible under s DO 6. Recipients of a capital contribution have a choice either to treat the contribution as income spread over 10 years on a straight-line basis, or to reduce their depreciation base or their expenditure under subpart DO. See ¶10-200 for discussion of the latter option provided for by s DB 64. Recognition of the capital contribution as income is the default treatment. This means an election must be made by a taxpayer to apply the exception under s DB 64. Note that with s CC 1B taxing lease inducement payments from 1 April 2013 (see ¶5-242), a contribution for fit-out costs may be taxable under both ss CC 1B and CG 8. However, Inland Revenue has confirmed that the tax treatment of amounts already subject to s CG 8 does not change. The amount is included in income only once (s BD 3(6)) and the timing rule for lease inducement payments in s EI 4B does not apply to an amount that is income under s CG 8. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 27. For an  example of how the two provisions should work together in practice, see ¶5-242. Law: IT07 ss CG 8, DB 64, YA 1  ¶5-358 Other income under subpart CG The following recovered amounts are also income under subpart CG: ▪ previously allowed deductions in relation to high-priced bloodstock on the sale or export of the bloodstock from New Zealand without first being raced or used for breeding in New Zealand — see ss CG 8B and CG 8C and ¶27-305 ▪ previously allowed deductions for aircraft engine maintenance on the disposal of the aircraft engine or aircraft — see s CG 9 and ¶10-127.  Adjustments ¶5-366 Income — adjustment for trading stock, livestock and excepted financial arrangements The following items held by a person at the end of an income year are income: ▪ the closing value of trading stock ▪ the closing value of livestock, and ▪ the closing value of excepted financial arrangements or sharelending rights that are revenue account property. At year-end, trading stock, livestock and excepted financial arrangements that are revenue account property are valued in accordance with subpart EB, subpart EC and subpart ED of the Income Tax Act 2007 respectively. Law: IT07 s CH 1  ¶5-369 Income — adjustment for goods and services tax A GST input tax deduction made on a return-by-return basis for a change in use of goods and services from a non-GST purpose to a GST-purpose (see ¶32-088) is income. The income is allocated to the income year in which the input tax deduction is claimed. However, this does not apply to one-off GST adjustments arising when an asset used mostly for private or exempt purposes is applied permanently to 100% taxable purposes. In this case, the GST adjustment reduces the depreciation base price of the asset. Law: IT07 s CH 5  ¶5-372 Other income under subpart CH The following amounts are also income from adjustments: ▪ unexpired amounts of expenditure — see s CH 2 and ¶10-052 ▪ unpaid amounts of expenditure on employment income — see s CH 3 and ¶10-292 ▪ adjustments for changes to accounting practice — see s CH 4 and ¶5-097 ▪ adjustments for leases that become finance leases and certain operating leases — see s CH 6 and ¶6-700 ▪ adjustments for certain avoidance arrangements — see s CH 7 ▪ adjustments for non-market transactions — see s CH 8 ▪ adjustments for interest apportionment on thin capitalisation — see ss CH 9, CH 10, CH 10B and ¶26-620 ▪ adjustments for Te Pou Tupua expenditure — see s CH 11 ▪ income from a hybrid mismatch arrangement under subpart FH — see s CH 12 and ¶26-650.  Income from voluntary activities ¶5-374 Income from voluntary activities Generally, amounts derived by a person from voluntary activities are taxable income to that person, unless the amounts received are reimbursement payments for expenditure actually incurred by the volunteer. See ¶3-455. Law: IT07 ss CO 1, CW 62B  Income from portfolio investments entities ¶5-378 Multi-rate PIE income attributed to investors A person’s income includes any amount of attributed PIE income. Attributed PIE income is that income attributed to an investor in a multi-rate PIE. The income is derived by the person in the income year of that person that includes the PIE’s income year end for that attributed income. For investors who satisfy the requirements of s CX 56 (and who are not individual investors), the PIE attributed income will be excluded income. See ¶29-145. Law: IT07 ss CP 1, CX 56  Attributed income from foreign equity ¶5-382 Attributed CFC income A person’s income includes all attributed CFC income. CFC refers to a controlled foreign company. Attributed CFC income is generally income attributed from a foreign company in accordance with ss EX 1–EX 27 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Special rules set out when attributed CFC income arises and how it is calculated. See ¶26-042.  Law: IT07 ss CQ 1–CQ 3  ¶5-384 FIF income A person's income includes all FIF income. FIF refers to a foreign investment fund. The FIF rules apply to non-resident investment vehicles where New Zealand residents hold interests that do not qualify as controlled foreign companies. The FIF rules are set out in ss EX 28–EX 72 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Special rules set out when FIF income arises and how it is calculated. See ¶26-110. Law: IT07 s CQ 4–CQ 6  Other income ¶5-390 Voluntary payments may be income A voluntary payment may be income to the recipient when it can be viewed as an addition to trading receipts. Example 1: Wool compulsorily acquired from a farmer was sold at a higher than expected price by the Government. The farmer received an additional voluntary payment from the Government that was held to be assessable for tax purposes. See FC of T v Squatting Investment Co Ltd [1954] AC 182.  A voluntary payment is not income when it is paid because of the personal qualities of the recipient. Example 2: A solicitor received a gift of $10,000 from a client. This amount was not assessable since it was referable to the personal attitudes of the donor and donee. See Scott v FC of T (1966) 117 CLR 514.  See also ¶5-189.  ¶5-396 Taxation of compensation proceeds and lump sum settlement payments A taxpayer may receive compensation, damages or insurance proceeds. An amount of this type that is received for loss or damage to trading stock and anything acquired, manufactured or produced for a purpose ancillary to a business of manufacturing or producing goods for sale or exchange is income. See ¶5-346. There is, however, no clear-cut rule in relation to other insurance proceeds and compensation and damages payments. Generally, compensation received for the loss, or loss of use, of a capital asset is regarded as of a capital nature and not taxable. Example 1: A company was required to stop mining fireclay because it ran under a railway line. The compensation paid was a capital receipt because it was paid for the sterilisation of a capital asset. See Glenboig Union Fireclay Co Ltd v IR Commrs (1921) 12 TC 427.  In contrast, when compensation or damages are received in respect of the loss of profits, the receipts will be income. Example 2: Mr TP was a shipowner who had recovered damages from repairers of a ship for failing to complete the overhaul of the ship within the stipulated time. The damages were assessed by reference to the estimated profits which the ship would have earned had it been trading during the excess time taken for the overhaul. The court held that the damages were assessable income of the taxpayer. See Burmah Steam Ship Co Ltd v Commrs of IR (1931) 16 TC 67.  For discussion of when compensation for loss of business profits is derived, see ¶5-345. Lump sum settlement payments In February 2020, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 20/01, “Income tax — treatment of the receipt of lump  sum settlement payments” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 3, April 2020 at 10). (Note that IS 20/01 replaced IS 16/04 (released in October 2016), but did not make any changes except to correctly attribute the quote in para 68 of the statement.) The statement considers how the Commissioner will treat a lump sum payment received under a settlement agreement for claims that (if successful) would have resulted in receipts of both a capital and revenue nature. Whether a settlement payment is taxable depends on what it is paid for — in this case, what was given up in return for the payment — and its nature in the hands of the recipient. It is essential to first determine what a payment is for before determining whether apportionment is necessary. The item discusses the suggestion that two High Court of Australia decisions, McLaurin v FCT (1961) 12 ATD 273 and Allsop v FCT (1965) 14 ATD 62, are authority for the proposition that, if an undissected settlement payment includes both capital and revenue amounts, the whole amount will be treated as capital. To the extent that McLaurin and Allsop stand for this proposition, the Commissioner’s view is that they would not be followed in New Zealand. Rather, where possible, New Zealand courts would seek a reasonable basis for apportioning a lump sum. Given this, where a single undissected sum is received, it should be apportioned between its capital and revenue elements where possible. Any apportionment must be made on an objective basis. The starting point for determining an appropriate apportionment will be the settlement agreement and any related documents. Where necessary, the circumstances surrounding the agreement and other relevant evidence should be considered. The onus of proof is on the taxpayer to show the apportionment is appropriate. The item states that in the rare circumstance where the payment cannot be appropriately apportioned, the amount must be considered as a whole. In the Commissioner’s view, generally, where an amount cannot be apportioned, the full amount will be income.  ¶5-409 Interest element in compensation  In determining whether an interest element contained in a payment of compensation or damages is income or capital, the terms of the award or settlement become relevant. Generally, when interest is payable in addition to the amount of the claim, the interest element is income. Example 1: A farmer was awarded compensation together with interest by the Government for compulsorily acquired land. The interest was to be calculated from the date on which the land was acquired until actual payment was received by the farmer. The interest was held to be assessable income. See Marshall v C of T [1953] NZLR 335.  Example 2: Land was compulsorily acquired for £28,000. An interest component was to run from the date of possession until the date of the payment of the compensation. The amount paid in excess of the £28,000 was regarded as assessable income. See Public Trustee v C of IR [1960] NZLR 365.  ¶5-414 Compensation for agency cancellation Compensation for the loss of an agency is a capital receipt if the agency constitutes the substratum of the recipient’s business. Example: A company repairing ships of a shipping company received a payment regarded as a capital receipt when the shipping company was liquidated. See Barr Crombie & Co Ltd v IR Commrs (1945) 26 TC 406.  On the other hand, compensation is income when the recipient holds several agencies and the loss of one is a normal trading risk. See IR Commrs v Fleming & Co (Machinery) Ltd (1952) 33 TC 57. A payment to a company as consideration for the variation and partial surrender of its rights under a long-term supply and marketing contract was held to be a payment of capital and not assessable.  See also C of IR v Thomas Borthwick & Sons (Australasia) Ltd (1992) 14 NZTC 9,101.  ¶5-419 Trade tie arrangements A number of cases have dealt with the situation of service station proprietors entering into agreements with oil companies whereby they agree to sell the products of one company exclusively (trade ties). Each agreement is different and must be considered on its merits. However, as a general rule, if a service station proprietor has converted from a multi-brand trader to an exclusive product retailer and this conversion involves a substantial alteration to the profitmaking structure or nature of the business, a lump sum received from an oil company as consideration for a trade tie of a reasonably long period is capital. This rule would also apply to sums expended on improvements or on the provision of capital assets of the person. If no essential change is made to the nature or structure of the business and the tie is not of a term sufficiently long to impart a capital character, payments to the service station proprietor may be treated as revenue in nature: Birkdale Service Station Ltd v C of IR, C of IR v Birkdale Service Station Ltd (2000) 19 NZTC 15,981 (CA). An important finding in that case was that the service station proprietors were not selling a capital asset, namely the freedom to deal with whomever they chose, because to remain in business as petroleum retailers they had no choice but to enter into the tie agreements. Further, they had already been trading with the products of only one supplier. See ¶5-031 and Maney & Sons de Luxe Service Station Ltd v C of IR [1967] NZLR 41. Interpretation statement “Tax treatment of payments received by petrol retailers in return for trade ties” sets out Inland Revenue’s views on the capital or revenue nature of trade tie payments received by petrol retailers. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 13. The interpretation statement lists the following factors as relevant to the inquiry: ▪ Whether the retailer has given up anything significant in return for the tie and, in particular, whether it has made structural  alterations to its overall business operation. ▪ The length of the trade tie. ▪ The correct accounting treatment. Further, it is the Commissioner’s view that the presence or absence of a dedicated use to which a receipt must be put is not determinative of the character of the receipt. It is the totality of the circumstances in which the payment is received that must be considered.  ¶5-425 Personal insurance compensation The tax treatment of insurance moneys received in cases in which key employees or directors are insured depends upon the purpose for which the insurance is taken out. It would seem that, if the particular policy taken out was a life or endowment policy, and it is not an accident policy, that fact would necessarily point to the proceeds of the policy being a capital receipt in the hands of the recipient. See also ¶3-185. An extended disablement insurance policy provides for payment of a weekly income in the event of disablement of the person insured. The payments are calculated according to an estimate of income lost, and continue until the person insured recovers, dies or reaches a specified age. Since the payments are to compensate for a loss of potential income, Inland Revenue regards payments under such policies as income derived by the person insured. See FC of T v DP Smith 81 ATC 4114. However, the premium paid should be deductible. See ¶10-540.  EXEMPT INCOME ¶5-593 Introduction to exempt income  In s BD 1, income is classified as exempt income, excluded income, non-resident foreign sourced income or assessable income. For income to be exempt it must first be income, see C of IR v Brierley (1990) 12 NZTC 7,184 (CA). Many items are expressly exempted from income tax. Amounts that are exempt income are located in subpart CW of the Income Tax Act 2007. Under s DA 2(3) any expenditure that is incurred in deriving exempt income is unable to be deducted for tax purposes. This rule is called the exempt income limitation. In addition, many classes of person are exempt on all or some of the income they receive. There is a third category of income that may be called exempt income in the broad sense. This category covers items such as capital payments that are neither income according to ordinary concepts nor deemed to be taxable. This category is not truly described as exempt income because the items were never income in the first place in order that they might become exempted. Example: A company could not be exempt from income tax unless, but for that exemption, it would have been liable for income tax. See Australian Mutual Provident Society Ltd v C of IR [1961] 3 All ER 1051.  Law: IT07 subpart CW, ss BD 1(2), DA 2(3)  ¶5-598 Exempt income — amounts exempt from tax The following are wholly or partially exempt from tax under subpart CW: ▪ Accident Compensation Corporation personal service rehabilitation payments paid to a claimant and used for rehabilitation — see ¶5-653. ▪ Accommodation — see ¶3-425. ▪ Allowance for additional transport costs — see ¶3-445.  ▪ Allowances and benefits — see ¶5-630. ▪ Amateur games and sports bodies — see ¶24-130. ▪ Amounts from Australian complying superannuation schemes reinvested in KiwiSaver schemes — see ¶29-270. ▪ Annuities from Crown bank accounts — an annuity granted by the Executive Council of New Zealand and paid from the Crown Bank Account is exempt income, provided it is not designated as being subject to tax. See s CW 30. ▪ Annuities under life insurance policies — an annuity paid under a life insurance policy offered or entered into in New Zealand by a life insurer or paid under a life insurance policy offered or entered into offshore by a New Zealand resident life insurer is exempt income. This exemption does not apply to an annuity that is excluded income of a superannuation fund. See s CW 4. ▪ Avoidance arrangements — amounts treated as exempt income under ss GA 1 and GB 23. See s CW 63. ▪ Charitable bequests — income derived by a deceased’s administrator or executor from property left to a charity. The exemption will only apply if the income in question, if derived by a charitable trust, society or institution, would have been exempt from income tax under the other exemptions for a charity. See CW 43. ▪ Charities: business income — see ¶24-200, ¶24-210. ▪ Charities: non-business income — see ¶24-240. ▪ Community housing entities — see ¶24-132. ▪ Community trusts — see ¶24-133. ▪ Compensation payments — see ¶5-653.  ▪ Deferred military pay for active service — see ¶5-658. ▪ Disability support payments — see ¶5-655. ▪ Disposal of companies’ own shares — see ¶16-700. ▪ Distinctive work clothing — see ¶3-430. ▪ Distributions from a complying trust other than beneficiary income — see ¶25-305. ▪ Dividend derived from foreign company — see ¶16-800. ▪ Dividend paid by a qualifying company — see ¶19-115. ▪ Dividend within New Zealand wholly-owned group — see ¶16800. ▪ Employee reimbursement and expenditure on account — see ¶3435. ▪ Employee share schemes — see ¶3-471 ▪ Exemption under other Acts — see ¶5-685 and ¶5-690. ▪ Foreign-sourced amounts derived by a New Zealand resident trustee — see ¶25-035 and ¶25-245. ▪ Foreign superannuation withdrawals — see ¶5-648. ▪ Forestry companies and Māori investment companies — interest derived from a qualifying debenture — see ¶28-050. ▪ Forestry companies established by Crown, Māori owners and holding companies — see ¶28-050. ▪ Forestry rights — Treaty of Waitangi claim settlements — see ¶28-021.  ▪ Forestry encouragement agreements — income advanced under a forestry encouragement agreement is exempt income. Also, in some cases, interest under the agreement that a person is relieved from paying is exempt income. See s CW 2. ▪ Friendly societies — see ¶24-131. ▪ Funeral trusts — see ¶24-134. ▪ Gaming-machine income derived by a gaming-machine licensed operator who complies with the Gambling Act 2003 — see s CW 48. ▪ Governor-General’s income — the allowance, benefits and privileges of the Governor-General is exempt income. See s CW 16 and ¶3-016. ▪ Herd improvement bodies — see ¶24-139. ▪ Interest: farm mortgages — 50% of the interest derived from a mortgage securing a loan made by a seller of a farm is exempt income if the Rural Banking and Finance Corporation of New Zealand approves the mortgage and the Corporation gives the Commissioner of Inland Revenue notice of the approval and each variation. This exemption does not apply to an absentee, a company, a Māori authority, a public authority, a trustee liable for income tax under subpart HC and s HZ 2, or to an unincorporated body. A person deriving exempt interest cannot also claim a tax credit for the interest under the home vendor mortgages tax credit provisions. See s CW 6. ▪ Interest: foreign-sourced — see ¶5-613. ▪ Interest: paid by the Commissioner under s 84 of the KiwiSaver Act 2006. See s CW 62. ▪ Interest: post-war credits — wholly exempt from income tax. See s CW 5.  ▪ Jurors’ and witnesses fees (but not expert witnesses) — wholly exempt from income tax. See s CW 26. ▪ Life reinsurance outside New Zealand — a life reinsurance claim derived by a life insurer to the extent to which deductions for premiums are denied. See s CW 59C. ▪ Loans to New Zealand Government — see ¶5-628. ▪ Local authorities — see ¶5-610, ¶24-035 and ¶24-040. ▪ Local and regional promotion bodies — see ¶24-035 and ¶24137. ▪ Maintenance payments — child support or spousal maintenance under the Child Support Act 1991 and a payment in the nature of maintenance out of money belonging to a person’s current or former spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner is exempt income. See s CW 32. ▪ Māori authority distributions — see ¶24-311. ▪ Military and police service in operational areas — see ¶5-658. ▪ Minors’ income to a limited extent — see ¶11-035. ▪ Mixed-use assets — see ¶5-635. ▪ New Zealand companies operating in Niue — income derived by certain New Zealand companies that is derived wholly or mainly from Niue or from a Niue development project is exempt income. A dividend derived by certain persons from a New Zealand company that derives its income wholly or mainly from Niue is also exempt income. See s CW 59. ▪ New Zealand Railways Corporation restructure — see s CW 65. ▪ Niue International Trust Fund — income derived or distributed by the trustees. See s CW 59B.  ▪ Non-resident aircraft operators — income derived by a nonresident engaged in air transport to or from New Zealand to the extent to which the Commissioner determines that a New Zealand resident operator would be correspondingly exempt from income tax under the laws of the country in which the nonresident operator is based. See s CW 56. ▪ Non-resident companies involved in certain petroleum exploration and development activities — see ¶28-135. ▪ Non-residents’ proceeds from the sale or other disposal of shares or options that were acquired under a venture investment agreement — see s CW 13. ▪ Overseas experts and trainees — see ¶3-292 and ¶5-638. ▪ Overtime and work-related meal payments and certain sustenance allowances — see ¶3-448. ▪ Partners: amounts of exempt income arising under subpart HG — see s CW 55B. ▪ Pensions — see ¶5-643. ▪ Public authorities — see ¶5-605. ▪ Public purpose Crown-controlled companies — see ¶5-606. ▪ Qualifying foreign equity investors’ proceeds from the sale or other disposal of certain shares or options — see ¶26-438. ▪ Rebate of fees paid by a foreign investment fund (FIF) — if a person with an attributing interest in a FIF receives a rebate of fees from another person to whom the FIF paid fees and the person is not allowed a deduction for the fees and their FIF income or loss is not calculated using the comparative value method. See s CW 55BAB.  ▪ Religious society members — the value of personal board, lodging and other basic personal necessities received by members of a religious society or order for whom it is their sole occupation and in which the conditions of service are such that no monetary or other rewards are payable in respect of these services. See s CW 25. ▪ Relocation payments — see ¶3-446. ▪ Scholarships and bursaries — see ¶5-633. ▪ Scientific or industrial research bodies — see ¶24-135. ▪ Services for members of Parliament — amounts for certain travel, accommodation, and communication services referred to in the Members of Parliament (Remuneration and Services) Act 2013 and provided to a member of Parliament, a qualifying electoral candidate or any family member of such a person, and travel entitlements of a former member of Parliament or Prime Minister, and international travel or accommodation and communication services provided to a member of the Executive are exempt income. See s CW 31. ▪ Short-term visits of non-residents — see ¶3-291, ¶3-292 and ¶26-420. ▪ Stake moneys — see ¶27-305. ▪ Standard-cost household services — see ¶5-695. ▪ TAB and racing clubs — see ¶24-136. ▪ Tertiary education institutions — income derived by a tertiary education institution that is established or continued under subpart 3 or 4 of Pt 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, established under Pt 14 or 15A, or subpart 1 of Pt 10 of sch 1 of the Education Act 1989) and has not been disestablished under that Act and that is not carried on  for the private pecuniary profit of any individual, or its subsidiary — see ¶24-275. ▪ Te Urewera Board income — see s CW 40B. ▪ Tokelau International Trust Fund — income derived or distributed by the trustees. See s CW 59B. ▪ Transitional residents — certain income derived by transitional residents is exempt. See ¶5-700. ▪ Veterinary services bodies — see ¶24-139. ▪ Visiting crew of pleasure craft — see ¶5-640. ▪ Visiting entertainers and sportspersons — see ¶26-485. ▪ Volunteer workers — see ¶3-455. ▪ Withdrawals from certain Australian superannuation funds which are reinvested in other Australian superannuation funds in the same income year — see s CW 29. Law: IT07 subpart CW  ¶5-605 Exempt income derived by public authorities Any amount derived by a public authority is exempt income: s CW 38(2). However, this general rule is subject to several exclusions, noted below. Section CW 38(1) specifically provides that an amount derived from a sinking fund relating to a public authority’s debt is exempt income. A “public authority” means every department or instrument of the Executive Government of New Zealand and includes: ▪ the Public Trust and the Māori Trustee ▪ the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission  ▪ the New Zealand Lottery Grants Board ▪ the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives ▪ the Ombudsman ▪ the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment ▪ the Parliamentary Service, and ▪ the Official Assignee, other than in their capacity as a trustee, but does not include a mixed-ownership enterprise. For the purposes of s CW 38, “public authority” also includes the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. In C of IR v Medical Council of New Zealand (1997) 18 NZTC 13,088, the Court of Appeal found that although the Medical Council was established exclusively for charitable purposes and was exempt from tax, it was not an instrument of the Executive Government and therefore not a public authority qualifying for the exemption. Exclusions However, the general exemption in s CW 38(2) does not apply to the following public authorities: ▪ Public Trust ▪ any public authority to the extent to which it is a superannuation scheme ▪ any State enterprises ▪ any Crown Research Institute ▪ a Fund investment vehicle as referred to in s 59A of the New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Income Act 2001  ▪ with effect from 14 December 2019, a VCF investment vehicle as referred to in s 25 of the Venture Capital Fund Act 2019, and ▪ a company that is treated as being wholly owned by the Crown under s HR 4B (Activities relating to New Zealand Superannuation Fund and Venture Capital Fund). Mixed-ownership enterprises (see ¶24-020) are also excluded from the exemption. In addition, an amount derived by a trustee for a public authority constituted as a trust: ▪ does not enjoy the exempt income status under s CW 38(2) if that amount is retained and included in trustee income of the trustee, but ▪ is exempt income if that amount is distributed to a beneficiary that itself is exempt from income tax in relation to that distribution. To the extent that the income of a public authority is liable to tax, it is taxable at the same rate that applies to a resident company. See sch 1, pt A, cl 2 of the Income Tax Act. Law: IT07 ss CW 38, YA 1, sch 1  ¶5-606 Exempt income derived by public purpose Crowncontrolled companies With effect from 18 March 2019, certain Crown-controlled companies have been given their own income tax exemption. The qualifying “public purpose Crown-controlled companies” are listed in sch 35 to the Income Tax Act 2007. Also included are wholly-owned subsidiaries of the companies listed in sch 35 if the subsidiary’s primary purpose is the carrying out of a public policy objective of the Government. An Order in Council mechanism facilitates amendments to this schedule. The changes effectively reinstate the tax outcome the companies had before a Crown Law interpretation  reduced who qualified as a “public authority”. Schedule 35 includes the following companies: ▪ City Rail Link Limited ▪ Crown Asset Management Limited ▪ Crown Infrastructure Partners Limited ▪ Education Payroll Limited ▪ with effect from 31 May 2019, New Zealand Green Investment Finance Limited ▪ with effect from 18 December 2020, Ngāpuhi Investment Fund Limited ▪ Ōtākaro Limited ▪ with effect from 4 October 2019, Provincial Growth Fund Limited ▪ Research and Education Advanced Network New Zealand Limited ▪ Southern Response Earthquake Services Limited ▪ Tāmaki Redevelopment Company Limited ▪ Tāmaki Regeneration Limited ▪ The Network for Learning Limited. Law: ITA ss CW 38B, YA 1, sch 35  ¶5-610 Exempt income derived by local authorities Any amount derived by a local authority is exempt income, except where the amount is:  ▪ income that a local authority derives as a trustee, other than an amount distributed to a beneficiary that itself is exempt from income tax in relation to that distribution ▪ an amount (other than rates) derived by a local authority from: □ any council-controlled organisation linked by ownership or control to the local authority, other than from a hospital operating as a charitable activity for the local authority (see ¶24-035), or □ any energy or port company, or subsidiary of a port company ▪ an amount derived by a local authority in its capacity as a port operator from a port-related commercial undertaking (as defined in s 38(4) of the Port Companies Act 1988). An amount derived from a sinking fund relating to a local authority’s debt is specifically provided to be exempt income. Local authorities are effectively liable for tax on any income that they derive from entities that are under their control. They are subject to tax at the rate of 28¢ in the dollar. See sch 1 pt A cl 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007. See ¶5-200 for discussion of C of IR v Wellington Regional Stadium Trust (2005) 22 NZTC 19,445 (CA) which considered whether the trust, in holding events at the Wellington Stadium, was operating a trading undertaking for the purpose of making a profit. For tax purposes, a “local authority” means a local authority of any of the classes specified in the Local Government Act 2002, and includes a number of other boards and authorities established by various Acts; for example, the Canterbury Museum Trust Board and the Auckland Regional Transport Authority — see s YA 1, definition of “local authority”. Law: IT07 ss CW 39, YA 1, sch 1  ¶5-613 Exempt income — foreign-sourced interest  Interest derived from a country or territory outside New Zealand is exempt income if the person deriving the interest was not resident in New Zealand during the period for which the interest was payable and the interest was exempt from tax under the laws of the foreign country. Further, the foreign tax in question must be substantially the same as income tax imposed under the Income Tax Act 2007. This exemption applies to a person taking up residence in New Zealand who subsequently receives a payment of interest that accrued before the person became resident in New Zealand and was exempt in the country of source. The country of source need not have been the country in which the person formerly resided. Exempt interest received in New Zealand from a foreign country by a person who is not resident in New Zealand when the interest is payable is not liable for income tax in New Zealand. Law: IT07 s CW 7  ¶5-628 Exempt income — loans to Government by nonresidents Income (in the form of interest or redemption payments) of a nonresident is exempt from tax if it is payable out of New Zealand and is derived from or in relation to money lent to the New Zealand Government or to any local or public authority. With respect to a loan made to a local or public authority, the following criteria must be satisfied for the exemption from income to apply: ▪ the money is lent for the purposes of a non-commercial activity carried on in New Zealand by the local or public authority, and ▪ the New Zealand Government has approved the exempt status of the interest or redemption payment. Law: IT07 s CW 8  ¶5-630 Exempt income — allowances and benefits  The types of allowances and benefits that are exempt income are summarised below: ▪ monetary benefits under the Social Security Act 2018, but not income-tested benefits, or a payment of New Zealand superannuation equivalent assistance or veteran’s pension equivalent assistance (see below) ▪ accident compensation payments of the following types: □ a payment for treatment or rehabilitation □ an independence allowance □ a funeral grant □ a survivor’s grant, and □ a childcare payment ▪ a payment under ss 363, 386AAG or 386B of the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989 ▪ participation allowances ▪ disabled workshop payments (see below) ▪ amounts derived by a trustee of a trust created for victims of thalidomide or distributions to beneficiaries from the trust, and ▪ amounts derived by a trustee of the New Zealand Agent Orange Trust or distributions to beneficiaries from the trust. Exclusions from exempt income Monetary benefits under the Social Security Act 2018 are exempt income. However, income-tested benefits (ie sole parent support, emergency benefit, supported living payment, jobseeker support, young parent payment, youth payment or main benefit equivalent assistance), and payments of New Zealand superannuation  equivalent assistance or veteran’s pension equivalent assistance (which are paid under the Social Security Act 2018 as part of the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support Programme) are excluded from being exempt income. These amounts are income. See ¶5-307. Income relief payment On 25 May 2020, the government announced a new temporary payment, the income relief payment, to support New Zealanders who lose their jobs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The payment is to assist them to adjust and find new employment or to retrain in a different area. A person cannot receive the income relief payment at the same time as receiving another benefit. The payment is available to anyone who loses their job (including self-employment) due to the impact of COVID-19 between 1 March and 30 October 2020 (inclusive) and who normally worked 15 hours or more a week for 12 weeks or more. The payment is available for up to 12 weeks from 8 June and the amount payable is $490 per week for those who were previously working 30 hours or more a week and $250 per week for those who were previously working 15 to 29 hours a week. These payments are exempt income and will not be taxed. The scheme is administered by Work and Income and more information is available on the Work and Income website. Disabled workshop payments Disabled workshop payments are payments made to a disabled person for undertaking therapeutic activities in a sheltered workshop or in a similar workshop if the average amount paid in a tax year is no more than $50 per week. The average amount paid is calculated by taking the total income derived from the therapeutic activities for the year and dividing that total by the number of weeks in the tax year that the disabled person worked in the sheltered workshop. Example:  Mr TP is a disabled person who receives $60 per week for 20 weeks and $36 per week for 15 weeks. His average weekly income would be: $ 20 weeks @ $60  1,200  15 weeks @ $36  540  $  1,740 Average weekly earnings—  1,740 ÷  35 = 49.71  Mr TP’s earnings would be exempt from tax because they average less than $50 per week.  When the income from the workshop exceeds $50 per week, the whole of the income is taxable. There is no provision for exempting only the first $50 per week. Law: IT07 s CW 33  ¶5-633 Exempt income — scholarships and bursaries Any scholarship or bursary for a person’s attendance at an educational institution is exempt income. The exemption does not apply to a basic grant or an independent circumstances grant under regulations made under s 645 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, s 303 of the Education Act 1989), which are included within the definition of “salary or wages” and constitute income and are taxable at source. The essential issue when considering the status of an allowance is to determine the true character of the allowance, judged in relation to the recipient. Example 1: A trainee teacher allowance was held to be exempt. The court regarded the allowance as a bursary because they were paid to, and received by, the student to assist in their education and for the purpose of sustaining the student while furthering their education. The fact that conditions as to service for a period after graduation were  attached to the arrangement did not make the payments any less a bursary. See Reid v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,624.  Where a person is not employed by his or her prospective employer at the date of the commencement of an agreement for assistance, an allowance may be treated as exempt income. Example 2: The taxpayer, a financial analyst, received a grant of financial assistance from a government department to enable him to complete his university studies. The grant was exempt from income tax as the true flavour of the agreement was the provision of financial assistance to enable the taxpayer to complete his studies. The taxpayer was not employed by the department at the date on which the agreement for assistance commenced. The taxpayer came to be employed under an entirely separate employment contract at a later date. See Case P23 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,166.  This exemption may not apply in relation to an employee who receives payments from his or her employer while attending university full-time to complete a degree. Example 3: A taxpayer agreed with his employer (the Post Office) to undertake university study to complete an accountancy degree in return for study leave on full pay. Payments made to the taxpayer had to be repaid to the employer if he resigned before fulfilling all terms of the agreement. The court held that the payments were taxable as they had been made principally to secure the taxpayer’s services once he had completed his studies. Assistance to the taxpayer in his education was a secondary purpose only. See C of IR v Drew (1988) 10 NZTC 5,060. See also Case T46 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,311.  Commissioner’s statement In August 2015, IR released interpretation statement IS 15/01: “Income tax — tax exempt scholarships and bursaries — s CW 36” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 9, October 2015 at 3), which considers the requirements for a payment to be exempt under s CW 36. The statement confirms that the payment’s true character must  be looked at and states that this is established by looking at the agreement that gives rise to the payment and the surrounding circumstances. There is no single rigid test, but the courts consider the relationship between the payer and payee, the contractual basis for the payment, the conditions of the agreement and what the payee is required to provide in return for the payment. For the exemption to apply, the scholarship or bursary must be made for the dominant purpose of assisting with the recipient’s education. Some of the other points made in the statement are as follows: ▪ The amount must first be income of the recipient. Not all scholarships and bursaries are income. ▪ The amount cannot be a basic grant or an independent circumstances grant under regulations made under s 303 of the Education Act 1989. [Note that, with effect from 1 August 2020, this provision has been replaced by s 645 of the Education and Training Act 2020.] ▪ The amount is a scholarship or bursary. A bursary is a sum of money, or its equivalent, granted to a person meeting certain criteria (often needs-based) to assist with their education. A scholarship is a sum of money, or its equivalent, granted to a person to enable them to pursue their studies where the person is selected on merit or other rational criteria. ▪ A special relationship between the payer and the recipient may make it harder to demonstrate that the primary purpose of a payment is to assist with the recipient’s education because there can be competing reasons for making the payment. ▪ The bursary or scholarship may be granted on the condition that the recipient is required to provide services for, or on behalf of, the payer. This may not prevent a payment from being a bursary or scholarship so long as the true character of the payment is to assist the recipient’s education and the payment is not primarily for the payer’s benefit. If a payment is equivalent to an amount previously paid as salary or wages, this suggests the payment is  simply a re-characterisation of salary or wages and not a scholarship or bursary. The existence of a bonding arrangement between the payer and the recipient may not prevent the payment being a scholarship or bursary. However, if all of the payment is to be repaid if the contract is cancelled, this may indicate it is not a scholarship or bursary. ▪ The scholarship or bursary is for attendance at an educational institution. An “educational institution” under s CW 36 is a society or organisation founded for the sole or main purpose of the promotion of education and that actively provides that education. Education involves the imparting of knowledge through a systematic formal course of learning. “Attendance at” can be physical presence at the location where the course is being held, being enrolled and pursuing an educational course offered if it involves requirements other than physical presence, or a combination of both. Law: IT07 s CW 36  ¶5-635 Exempt income — private use of mixed-use assets Mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG apply to apportion expenditure when land, boats or aircraft are used for both private and incomeearning purposes. Section CW 8B(3) provides that income derived by a person for private use of a mixed-use asset is exempt income. Private use for these purposes is described in s DG 4(1). In addition, where the amount of income derived from the mixed-use asset in an income year is less than $4000, the person may choose to treat the income as exempt income under s CW 8B(2) and effectively opt out of the apportionment rules. Any expenditure will then be nondeductible. The decision to opt out is made in each year and can change from year to year. Companies cannot choose to opt out of the apportionment rules. See ¶10-035 for discussion of the mixed-use asset rules.  Law: IT07 ss CW 8B, DG 21  ¶5-638 Exempt income — overseas experts and trainees To qualify for an income tax exemption, a visiting expert or trainee must be in New Zealand pursuant to any of the following arrangements entered into by the government of New Zealand: ▪ the Commonwealth Education Scheme ▪ a programme of the United Nations, or any specialised agency of the United Nations, for cultural, economic, educational, expert, professional or technical assistance ▪ arrangements for training Samoan, Cook Islands, Niuean or Tokelauan public servants or other residents of those islands, or ▪ any other arrangement with another government or international organisation that is similar in principle to the above arrangements. The purpose of the visit must be for at least one of the following: providing professional or expert advice or assistance, teaching or lecturing, making investigations, or receiving education, training or experience. This exemption applies only to income received by a non-resident person from personal services performed on behalf of a non-resident employer or from a payment of maintenance, an allowance, a bursary or scholarship provided for or paid to that person. The exemption does not, in its terms, extend to other income such as interest and dividends that the visitor might also receive while in New Zealand. When determining whether the person is a non-resident, their presence in New Zealand under the government assistance arrangement is ignored and the “183-day rule” (see ¶1-120) does not apply. Law: IT07 s CW 22  ¶5-640 Exempt income — non-resident crew members performing services in New Zealand Income derived by a non-resident crew member from services performed in New Zealand for a non-resident in relation to a pleasure craft (see below) while it is in New Zealand is exempt from tax if all of the following conditions are met: ▪ the crew member is not present in New Zealand for more than 365 days in any two-year period ▪ the crew member is not in New Zealand unlawfully for immigration purposes ▪ the pleasure craft is a temporary import (within the meaning of s 136 of the Customs and Excise Act 2018), and ▪ the pleasure craft is not directly or indirectly owned (whether wholly or partly) by a New Zealand resident or a controlled foreign company. In determining a crew member’s residency, the “183-day rule” (see ¶1-120) does not apply. Briefly, a “pleasure craft” is a ship that is not offered or used for hire or reward, and is used exclusively for: ▪ the owner’s pleasure or as the owner’s residence, or ▪ recreational purposes by the members of a club, beneficiaries of a trust, or members of an incorporated society that owns the ship. The following types of ship are specifically excluded: ▪ a ship used by an institution, hotel, motel, place of entertainment or other establishment or business to provide transport or sport or recreation  ▪ a fishing ship or a ship normally used to carry passengers or cargo for hire or reward that is used for pleasure ▪ a ship used or operated by any club, incorporated society or trust for non-recreational purposes or by a business. Law: IT07 s CW 21  ¶5-643 Exempt income — overseas pensions and certain war service or disability pensions Pensions from overseas There are limited exemptions from income tax for some pensions received from overseas. Income derived by any person from an overseas pension is exempt to the extent to which it is subject to an arrangement under s 190 of the Social Security Act 2018. Recipients of UK social security pensions may elect to have their pension paid into a special bank account. The Department of Work and Income will then draw down the overseas pension and will pay the pensioner an amount equivalent to the full rate of New Zealand superannuation or veteran’s pension to which he or she is entitled. Section CW 28 applies to exempt the overseas pension from tax when paid into the special bank account. However, the equivalent amount of New Zealand superannuation, veteran’s pension or income-tested benefit remains subject to tax. The Department of Work and Income will deduct PAYE from the amount it pays. Portable New Zealand superannuation and portable veteran’s pension are also exempt from income tax. See also ¶5-663 regarding payments received from registered superannuation schemes. War service or disability pension Certain war service or disability pensions are exempt from income tax. Pensions granted under the Veterans’ Support Act 2014 (other than weekly compensation paid under subpart 5 of Pt 4 of that Act, and any veteran’s pension), ie economic pensions, pensions for  spouses of forces members, war service pensions or war veteran’s allowances, are exempt. A veteran’s pension is not exempt income. A veteran’s pension is a veteran’s pension, other than a portable veteran’s pension, paid or payable under Pt 6 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014. It also includes veteran’s pension equivalent assistance granted under the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support (NZSOS) Programme. The NZSOS Programme enables payments to be made to New Zealand beneficiaries and pensioners who are stranded overseas as a result of COVID-19, as these individuals would otherwise lose entitlement to their normal payments. Payments made under the NZSOS Programme are subject to the same tax treatment as their standard counterparts. However, a portable veteran’s pension is exempt. A portable veteran’s pension is a veteran’s pension paid or payable overseas under ss 182 or 191 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014 or s 19 of the Social Welfare (Reciprocity Agreements, and New Zealand Artificial Limb Service) Act 1990. Also exempt are other pensions or allowances granted by any government relating to war or to disability attributable to or aggravated by service in the armed forces or the police. In June 2018, Inland Revenue released QB 18/12, “Are war pensions paid under the Dutch ABVP Scheme exempt from tax?”, confirming that war pensions, as well as allowances, paid under the Dutch (Benefit Act for Victims of Persecution 1940–1945) Scheme are exempt income and are not taxed in New Zealand (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 136). Inland Revenue’s policy The income tax exemption does not apply to ordinary long-service (veteran’s) pensions or to superannuation. However, where a longservice military pension has been increased because of a pensioner’s war services, the amount of the increase is treated as a pension granted for war service and is exempt income.  Death is regarded as a disablement for this purpose. Accordingly, if a pension is specifically awarded to a dependant because the death of a relative is attributable to his or her service in the naval, military, air, or police forces, the pension is exempt income. If the pension is payable regardless of whether the death or disability is attributable to service in one of the specified forces and is in the nature of a normal service pension, it remains taxable. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 13, June 1994 at 3. Law: IT07 ss CW 28, YA 1  ¶5-648 Exempt income — foreign superannuation withdrawals From 1 April 2014, new rules apply to tax New Zealand residents on interests in, and income from, foreign superannuation schemes. The rules bring to tax a portion of lump sum withdrawals and transfers from foreign superannuation schemes on receipt, rather than on an accruals basis under the foreign investment fund rules as was previously the case. See further at ¶5-317. As part of these rules, s CW 28B provides for an exemption for withdrawals within the first four years of residency, similar to that for transitional residents. However, unlike the transitional resident rules, there is no requirement for a person to be non-tax resident for a minimum period to qualify for an exemption period. Thus, the exemption period is available to new migrants and returning New Zealanders alike. Also, unlike the transitional resident rules, it is not possible to opt out of the exemption period. Under s CW 28B, a foreign superannuation withdrawal will be exempt income of the person if the person is a New Zealand resident and the withdrawal is derived in the “exemption period”. The exemption period commences on the date the person becomes a New Zealand resident and ends on the earlier of: ▪ the end of the period of 48 months beginning after the end of the month in which the person becomes resident  ▪ the date the person becomes non-resident again. If a person becomes a New Zealand resident as a result of meeting the 183-day rule in s YD 1(3), the exemption period starts on the first day they are New Zealand resident (the first day of the 183-day period under s YD 1(4)), but does not end until 48 months after they actually triggered the 183-day rule (that is, on their 184th day in New Zealand). To have an exemption period for an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme, the person must: ▪ not have a previous exemption period ▪ have acquired the interest as a non-resident, and ▪ own the interest as a non-resident until becoming resident. Where a foreign superannuation withdrawal is derived outside the exemption period, ie within the assessable period, a portion of the amount received will be taxable under one of two methods provided for in s CF 3 (see ¶5-317). Section CW 28C provides that the part of the foreign superannuation withdrawal that is not taxable under the relevant method is exempt income. Law: IT07 ss CF 3(4)–(6), CW 28B, CW 28C, YA 1  ¶5-653 Exempt income — compensation payments A payment relating to incapacity for work is exempt income. This means a payment of one of the following kinds made to a person because they are, or another person is, incapacitated for work: ▪ a payment from a friendly society, or ▪ a payment from any sick, accident or death benefit fund to which the person was a contributor when the period of incapacity began, or  ▪ a payment under a policy of personal sickness or accident insurance, or an accident insurance contract, not calculated according to loss of earnings or profits, or ▪ an impairment payment made under subpart 4 of Pt 4 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014, but excluding: ▪ in the case of a payment under any of the first three bullet points above, payments of compensation made under s 188(1)(a) of the Accident Insurance Act 1988 before its repeal in 2000, for loss of earnings or loss of potential earning capacity relating to work-related personal injury and also weekly compensation paid under the Accident Insurance Act 1988 that is not recovered or recoverable, and ▪ in the case of a payment under the third bullet point above, weekly compensation paid under the Accident Compensation Act 2001 that is not recovered or recoverable under s 248 of that Act. The following compensation payments are also exempt income: ▪ payments under the Workers Compensation Act 1956 ▪ payments under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1963 ▪ approved distributions to ex-prisoners of war held in German concentration camps in World War 2 ▪ payments under German or Austrian laws to the victims of National Socialist persecution ▪ payments under sch 1 of the Crown Forest Assets Act 1989 (excluding cl 3(b)), and ▪ certain payments under the Maori Reserved Land Amendment Act 1977, being compensation payments, solatium payments or  payments to lessors for the purchase of leases under the Act (excluding interest paid under s 23 of the Act). See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 2, February 1998 at 2. Personal service rehabilitation payments (including backdated payments) paid to an ACC claimant under the Accident Compensation Act, where those payments are fully on-paid to another person to meet the cost of social rehabilitation services provided by the person to the claimant, are also exempt income to the claimant. Law: IT07 ss CW 34, CW 35  ¶5-655 Exempt income — disability support payments Where a person receives a direct funding disability support payment — this being a payment made by the Ministry of Health or a District Health Board to a disabled person, a person on their behalf, or their carer, to purchase disability support services — the payment will be treated as exempt income. “Disability support services” is defined in s 6(1) of the New Zealand Public Health and Disability Act 2000. Law: IT07 s CW 52B  ¶5-658 Exempt income — military or police services personnel — operational area pay and allowances and deferred pay Operational area pay and allowances — s CW 23 The pay and allowances derived by a member of the New Zealand Defence Force or the police for serving in an operational area is exempt income. The exemption applies to the extent to which the payments are related to a period of service in an operational area. The exemption does not apply to a regular force gratuity or a bonus or bounty for re-engagement in a regular force. An operational area is defined as an area to which the Minister of Defence has ordered deployment of New Zealand Defence Force  members for a specific mission and that the Chief of Defence delineates for that mission. The Ministerial committee has been granted the ability to exempt other amounts of income paid to members for being in an operational area in addition to the usual operational allowance. The Ministerial committee consists of the Prime Minister, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Police, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Deferred military pay — s CW 24 Deferred military pay granted or paid under the Defence Act 1990 for a person’s service in the New Zealand armed forces in an active service area is exempt income. For the exemption to apply, the Minister of Defence, with the agreement of the Minister of Finance, must declare the pay to be deferred military pay. An active service area is an area outside New Zealand that is designated as an active service area by the Minister of Defence, with the agreement of the Minister of Finance. Law: IT07 ss CW 23, CW 24  ¶5-663 Exempt income — superannuation fund benefits All payments made by registered superannuation schemes to their members, whether in the form of a pension or lump sum, are tax exempt. This is because tax is paid at the trustee level. See ¶29-410.  ¶5-683 Rewards from customer loyalty programmes not income Inland Revenue has issued a number of binding product rulings for various customer loyalty programmes. In general, the Commissioner’s view is that the accumulation and redemption of points for rewards under these programmes is not income for tax purposes. For example, see product rulings BR Prd 09/09 in relation to the redemption of Air New Zealand air points dollars (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009 at 4) and  BR Prd 02/10, issued in respect of the Mico Wakefield Ltd customer trade loyalty programme (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 14, No 9, September 2002 at 25).  ¶5-685 Income tax exemption for diplomats and consular officers There are exemptions from New Zealand income tax for diplomatic personnel serving in New Zealand. The Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities Act 1968 gives effect to the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and grants exemptions for foreign envoys, Commonwealth representatives and persons connected with them. The Consular Privileges and Immunities Act 1971 incorporates part of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and confers exemptions for consular staff. Income received by honorary consular officers from the foreign government on account of the exercise of consular functions is exempt from New Zealand income tax. There is no exemption for staff recruited locally by an embassy, legation or other representative of a foreign government. Such staff are required to account for tax deductions from their remuneration. ▸Note: In January 2021, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 21/01, “Income tax – Monthly retirement payments from the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund”. The item concludes that, while emoluments received by United Nations (UN) staff in active service to the UN are exempt from New Zealand income tax, monthly retirement payments from the UN Joint Staff Pension Fund (UNJSPF) are not. In general, monthly retirement payments received by retired UN staff members from the UNJSPF will be taxed as pensions (see ¶5-315). Law: IT07 s CW 64  ¶5-690 Other bodies exempt from income tax A number of other statutes specifically exempt certain income from income tax. Most of the exemptions in this category are  governmental or quasi-governmental bodies. Generally, the enabling statute of the particular body contains an exemption from income tax. Some of the more common exemptions in this category include the following bodies: ▪ ACC ▪ Arts Council of New Zealand Toi Aotearoa ▪ Broadcasting Commission ▪ Broadcasting Standards Authority ▪ Earthquake Commission ▪ Historic Places Trust ▪ Hillary Commission for Sport, Fitness and Leisure ▪ Lotteries Commission ▪ Māori Education Foundation ▪ Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa Board ▪ National Library Trustees ▪ New Zealand Fire Service Commission ▪ Royal New Zealand Foundation for the Blind ▪ Royal Society of New Zealand ▪ Sport and Recreation New Zealand, and ▪ Te Taura Whiri i Te Reo Māori (Māori Language Commission). Law: IT07 s CW 64  ¶5-695 Exemption for standard-cost household services  Overview There is an exemption for amounts derived by natural persons from providing services that the Commissioner determines under s 91AA of the Tax Administration Act 1994 are standard-cost household services. The Commissioner has determined that home-based childcare (see DET 09/02 referred to below), private boarding services (see DET 19/01 referred to below), short-stay accommodation (see DET 19/02 referred to below) and homeshare care (see DET 09/01 referred to below) are standard-cost household services. In broad terms, an amount derived from providing a standard-cost household service is exempt income if: ▪ the amount is exempt income under a determination made for a standard-cost household service (see further below), or ▪ the person may be treated under a determination for a standardcost household service as incurring costs that are greater than or equal to the amount of income and the person does not claim a deduction for any costs actually incurred in providing the standard-cost household service. The policy intent is to reduce compliance costs for persons providing these services. Determinations The Commissioner may determine that a service is a standard-cost household service if all of the following conditions are satisfied: ▪ the service is provided by natural persons ▪ the service requires the use of each taxpayer’s domestic accommodation in activities that commonly occur in a family household ▪ the Commissioner considers that the determination would result in a significant reduction in compliance costs for providers of the service without: □ inappropriate risk to Crown revenue  □ inappropriate demands on the resources of the Commissioner in enforcing the determination, and □ undue inaccuracy in the costs of providing the service for a significant number of service providers. For the purpose of calculating the income tax liability of a person who derives an amount from a standard-cost household service, the Commissioner may determine: ▪ the requirements for the exemption of income derived from providing the standard-cost household service ▪ a figure for a cost or costs that may be treated as being incurred by a taxpayer in deriving this type of exempt income ▪ a method that a taxpayer may use to calculate a figure for a cost or costs that may be treated as being incurred in deriving this type of exempt income ▪ a figure for a cost or costs that may be treated as being incurred by a taxpayer in deriving income from providing the standardcost household service ▪ a method that a taxpayer may use to calculate a figure for a cost or costs that may be treated as being incurred by the taxpayer in deriving income from providing the standard-cost household service, and ▪ the requirements for the application of a determination in respect of the above. The Commissioner has the power to vary, rescind, restrict or extend the determination made. The determination may specify the income years in which it applies. A standard-cost household service determination must be published in a publication chosen by the Commissioner within 30 days of it being made. The publication will usually be the Tax Information  Bulletin. Historically they were published in the New Zealand Gazette. A person who derives an amount from providing the standard-cost household service may then elect whether to use the figures or methods in the Commissioner’s determination. A person who applies the determination must not use any figure for an additional cost of providing the standard-cost household service if the type of additional cost is included in the determination. Childcare providers The Commissioner released Determination DET 09/02: “StandardCost Household Service for Childcare Providers” in 2009. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 4, June 2009 at 10. This determination applies to all natural persons who are not registered for goods and services tax (GST) and who have provided childcare services in their own home in accordance with the Education (HomeBased Care) Order 1992. This determination applies to the 2008–09 and subsequent income years until it is replaced but is subject to an adjustment based on the annual movement of the Consumers Price Index, as at 31 March each year. Briefly, the determination sets the variable standard cost of providing childcare in a person’s home. The cost components of the amount set are outlined in Appendix A of the determination. The determination also sets out the annual fixed standard cost for administration and record-keeping. A formula is provided for the calculation of the fixed standard cost for domestic accommodation, depending on whether the person owns or rents his or her home. Also, if the person receives an accommodation supplement, the amount calculated under the formula will be reduced by the amount of the accommodation supplement. All costs are GST-inclusive. The variable standard cost and the fixed standard cost for administration and record-keeping are reviewed each year for the movement of the All Groups Consumers Price Index as at 31 March. For the 2019–20 income year, the variable standard cost of providing childcare in the person’s home is $3.70 per hour per child. This is to cover the cost of fuel, electricity, food, wear and tear, laundry, first  aid, educational resources, and outings and associated transport costs. The fixed standard cost for administration and record-keeping is $361 per annum for a full 52 weeks of childcare services provided. Boarding service providers For income years before 2019–20 income year The Commissioner released Determination DET 05/03: “StandardCost Household Service for Boarding Service Providers”; see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 10, December 2005 at 54. The determination may be applied by natural persons who provide private boarding services in their domestic accommodation (ie the service provider’s principal residence) for income years before the 2019–20 income year. The determination does not apply where: ▪ the person’s activities are the subject of any other determination relating to a standard-cost household service ▪ the boarding services are provided as part of a GST-taxable activity of a registered person, or ▪ the boarding service provider has on average five or more boarders in residence during the income year. Family visitors and short-stay visitors accommodated without charge are not boarders. Briefly, the determination sets out the weekly standard cost per boarder (ie the direct cost of providing private boarding services) and the formula for calculating the annual capital standard cost (ie the cost for the use of the domestic accommodation in providing the private boarding service, including financing and depreciation costs). The annual capital standard cost depends on whether a boarding service provider owns or rents their domestic accommodation. The annual capital cost is reduced by the amount of any accommodation supplement received by the boarding service provider. All costs are GST-inclusive. The weekly standard cost per boarder is reviewed each year for the movement of the All Groups Consumers Price Index as at 31 March.  The weekly standard-cost component for the 2018–19 income year has been set as follows: ▪ the weekly standard cost for one to two boarders is $270 each ▪ the weekly standard cost for each third and subsequent number of boarders is $222 each. Worked examples of the application of DET 05/03 are provided in Appendix B and Appendix C of the determination. For the 2019–20 and later income years Determination DET 19/01, “Standard-cost household service for private boarding service providers” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 49), replaced DET 05/03 with effect from the start of the 2019–20 income year. The standard-cost household service will be made up of three elements: weekly standard-cost per boarder, the annual capital standard-cost and the transport standard-cost. The main difference between DET 19/01 and DET 05/03 is in relation to transport costs. Since transport costs are not typically the type of expenditure incurred by a taxpayer providing boarding services, this element has been removed from the “weekly standard-cost per boarder” item. As a result, the weekly standard-cost per boarder has been reduced. However, if the taxpayer does provide transport as part of the boarding service, then a separate calculation may be carried out to work out the transport standard-cost. The weekly standard-cost per boarder has been set for the 2019–20 income year at $191 per boarder per week, after CPI adjustment. If the determination is used, actual costs cannot be used for expenditure covered by any of these elements, even if the standardcosts are not used for that particular element. If a taxpayer chooses to use the standard costs, income from providing the private boarding service will be exempt up to the amount of those costs. Income from providing the private boarding service will only need to be returned to the extent it exceeds the standard costs. Any  additional costs related to providing the private boarding service cannot be deducted if they relate to an item covered by any of the elements comprising the standard costs. Short-stay accommodation providers Determination DET 19/02, “Standard-cost household service for short-stay accommodation providers” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 66), is a new determination that follows a similar concept to that for boarding service providers (see above). Standard nightly costs have been set for deductions for short-stay accommodation hosts who rent out rooms in their own home. The standard costs reflect the likely average costs incurred by short-stay accommodation hosts. The standard costs are $51 a night if the host owns their home, and $46 a night if the host rents their home, for the 2019–20 income year. If a host qualifies to use the rules, they can choose to use the standard nightly costs. This means they do not have to work out the actual costs they incurred (which would involve apportionment calculations). Income from short-stay accommodation guests up to the amount of the standard costs would not have to be declared. Hosts would only need to return income in excess of the standard cost amount. The main criteria to be able to use the new rules are that: ▪ the person does not rent out rooms in their home for more than 100 nights in the year (counting each room that is rented out separately) ▪ the property is not held in a trust, or if it is they paid all of the costs for the year for the use of the property (eg mortgage interest or rent, insurance, rates, and repairs and maintenance) ▪ the person does not provide the short-stay accommodation as part of a GST taxable activity ▪ no other standard-cost determination applies to the accommodation ▪ the person is a natural person.  Note that if a person cannot, or chooses not to, use the standardcost approach in DET 19/02, their deductions will be based on their actual costs. QB 19/05, “What are my income tax obligations if I rent out my home or a separate dwelling on my property as short-stay accommodation?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 3), sets out how to calculate the percentage of mixed expenses (that relate to both the rental activity and private use) that is tax deductible in that situation (see ¶10-113). Homeshare care providers The Commissioner released Determination DET 09/01: “StandardCost Household Service for Home share Care Providers”, with application from the 2008–09 income year. This determination only applies to services provided by home share providers via the Presbyterian Support (Upper South Island) Home share programme operating in the Mid Canterbury area. The determination applies only to natural persons, being home share care providers, who provide a day activity programme for older people in their own domestic accommodation. It is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 3, May 2009 at 15. Law: IT07 ss CW 61, DA 2(3), YA 1; TAA s 91AA  ¶5-700 Exemption for transitional residents There is a temporary exemption from income tax for a foreignsourced amount derived by a transitional resident. The exemption may be claimed only once. It excludes certain income from employment and personal services. The exemption arose because the Government wishes to assist New Zealand businesses seeking to attract skilled and knowledgeable individuals. The intended effect is for a person who has the status of a transitional resident to be treated as deriving income in the capacity of a non-resident. The exemption period, which ends if a person becomes a nonresident, is for up to four years and one month (although note that, because of the application of the back-dating rule for determining  residency, the period of transitional residency may in fact be longer than this – see example below). A person is a transitional resident if: ▪ they are a natural person ▪ they are resident in New Zealand through acquiring a permanent place of abode, or through application of the 183-day rule (see ¶1-120) ▪ they did not satisfy the tax residence tests in s YD 1(2) or (3) and were not resident in New Zealand for a continuous period (the non-residence period) of at least 10 years immediately before meeting the residence tests ▪ they were not a transitional resident at any time before the nonresidence period, and ▪ the period of transitional residence has not ended. A person who satisfies these general requirements is a transitional resident. The period of transitional residence begins on the first day of residence in New Zealand under the permanent place of abode or 183-day test. Note that if the person becomes a New Zealand tax resident under the 183-day test, their tax residence will be backdated under s YD 1(4) to the first of the 183 days of presence in New Zealand, and their transitional residence will start from that date. The period of transitional residence ends on the earlier of: ▪ the day the person nominates ▪ the day before the person ceases to be a New Zealand resident, or ▪ the last day of the 48th month after the month in which they acquired a permanent place of abode in New Zealand or satisfied the 183-day rule (ignoring the backdating rule in s YD 1(4)).  Note that the 10-year non-residence period is calculated without taking into account the back-dating rule in s YD 1(4). This ensures that people are not disqualified under the 10-year rule merely because of backdated residence under the 183-day test. For example, disqualification could apply if a person returned to live in New Zealand after the required non-residence period but had visited New Zealand for a holiday a few months before doing so. The following example from IS 16/03, “Tax residence” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 10, October 2016 at 27), illustrates how the transitional residence period is calculated: Example  Facts: Robert visited New Zealand on 1 February 2011 for a job interview. On 15 May 2011 he relocated here permanently and acquired a permanent place of abode at that time. On 29 October 2011 he satisfied the 183-day rule and was deemed to be tax resident in New Zealand from 1 February 2011 because of the back-dating rule in s YD 1(4). He has never been tax resident in New Zealand before, and has not elected not to be a transitional resident. Result: Robert would qualify for transitional residence. His status as a transitional resident would run from 1 February 2011 to 31 May 2015, provided he remains resident here and does not make an election not to be a transitional resident.  Explanation: Robert is resident in New Zealand from 1 February 2011, under the 183day rule and s YD 1(4). Robert has never been a tax resident or transitional resident in New Zealand before, and he has not elected to not be a transitional resident. He therefore satisfies the requirements of s HR 8(2). Although Robert is treated as tax resident in New Zealand from 1 February 2011 (because of the back-dating rule in s YD 1(4)), he did not meet the requirements of either s YD 1(2) or (3) (ignoring the back-dating rule) for being a resident until 15 May 2011, when he moved here and acquired a permanent place of abode here. Robert acquired a permanent place of abode in New Zealand before he satisfied the 183-day rule. His status as a transitional resident would therefore run from 1 February 2011 (the date from which Robert is tax resident in New Zealand) to 31 May 2015 (the end of the 48th month after the month in which he acquired a permanent place of abode in New Zealand).  A foreign-sourced amount derived by a transitional resident is exempt income under s CW 27 provided that the income is not: ▪ employment income as described in s CE 1 (¶5-290) in connection with employment or service performed while the person is a transitional resident ▪ income from a supply of services. The Commissioner has given examples of the types of income to which the exemption applies in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 105. Electing not to be a transitional resident A person who would otherwise be a transitional resident may elect not to be a transitional resident on and after a date nominated by the person. The election is irrevocable once made. Any election must be made before the due date for the filing of the income tax return for the income year during which the person wishes the election to take effect, unless the person applies for, and is allowed, a further time. See s HR 8(4), (6) and (7). A person eligible to be a transitional resident who applies for Working for Families tax credits (under subparts MA–MG and MZ) is treated as having given notice to the Commissioner that he or she does not wish to be treated as a transitional resident. See s HR 8(5).  Impact of COVID-19 virus on period of transitional residence Inland Revenue has acknowledged that some transitional residents who had planned to leave New Zealand before the transitional residence period ended may have been unable to leave because of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, Inland Revenue has stated that a person will not be regarded as no longer a transitional resident simply because they are unable to leave New Zealand due to COVID-19. This is provided the individual leaves New Zealand within a reasonable time once they are no longer practically restricted from travelling. In that case, any additional days spent in New Zealand when they were unable to leave will be disregarded. Law: IT07 ss CW 27, HR 8  ¶5-710 Treaty of Waitangi settlements Inland Revenue (IR) interpretation statement “Income tax treatment of Treaty of Waitangi settlements” considers whether payments received by Māori claimant groups in settlement of Treaty of Waitangi claims and payments received from the Crown for funding settlement negotiations constitute assessable income. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 10, November 2004 at 8. Briefly, the statement provides as follows: ▪ Treaty settlement payments are neither income under s CB 1 (amounts derived from any business) nor income under ordinary concepts in terms of s CA 1(2). ▪ Where a Treaty settlement payment is delayed until settlement legislation is enacted, the payment is not income under s CC 3. ▪ Compensation paid under the Crown Forest Assets Act 1989 (except compensation based on market stumpage) is exempt income under s CW 34(1)(f). Compensation paid under that Act on the return of Crown forest land is not income under ss CA 1(2), CB 1, CB 24, CB 25 or CB 29.  ▪ Funding for settlement negotiations provided through the Office of Treaty Settlements is neither income under ordinary concepts nor an amount derived from a business. Claimant funding is not a payment to which s CX 47 applies because it is not provided in respect of any business carried on by claimant groups. IR also released “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 09/01: “Payments made in addition to financial redress under Treaty of Waitangi settlements — income tax treatment” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 2, April 2009 at 19). IR considers that postsettlement interest that is paid to compensate for a delay in payment of agreed financial redress under a Treaty settlement is a capital receipt and not taxable.  EXCLUDED INCOME ¶5-750 Introduction to excluded income Some types of receipts or benefits are referred to as excluded income. To be excluded income, the amount in question must be listed in subparts CX (Excluded income) or CZ (Terminating provisions) of the Income Tax Act 2007 and cannot be the person’s non-resident foreign-sourced income. Excluded income is not taken into account when calculating a person’s income tax liability (ie it is not included in the person’s assessable income). Any expenditure incurred in earning excluded income can be deducted under s DA 1 providing it is not disallowed by one of the limitations included in s DA 2. Law: IT07 subpart CX, subpart CZ, s BD 1(3)  ¶5-755 Items of excluded income The following amounts are excluded income: ▪ goods and services tax (GST) — being output tax on goods and services supplied or GST refunds received — see s CX 1  ▪ fringe benefits — see s CX 3 and ¶21-010 ▪ amounts derived by a superannuation fund from an investment in a life insurance policy offered or entered into in New Zealand — see s CX 40 and ¶29-410 ▪ certain income derived by New Zealand resident insurance underwriters from carrying on the business outside New Zealand — see s CX 41 ▪ consideration derived from disposing of shares or trust interests in a controlled petroleum mining entity — see s CX 42 and ¶28125 ▪ farm-in expenditure of a petroleum miner or a mineral miner who is the farm-out party under a farm-out arrangement — see s CX 43, ¶28-060 and ¶28-125 ▪ certain grants or subsidies or grant-related suspensory loans from a local authority or a public authority — see s CX 47, ¶5760 and ¶5-765 ▪ certain payments by a public authority for funding of film and television productions — see s CX 48C ▪ superannuation contributions made by employers — see s CX 49 and ¶29-410 ▪ payment by the Commissioner of an amount of a tax credit under subpart MK (KiwiSaver scheme and complying superannuation fund tax credits) — see s CX 50 and ¶29-250 ▪ retirement scheme contributions made by an eligible contributor — see s CX 50B and ¶29-320 ▪ refunds of excess deposits to the main income equalisation account or the thinning operations income equalisation account — see s CX 51  ▪ certain amounts derived from the disposal of a pre-1990 forest land emissions unit other than by surrender — see s CX 51B and ¶5-228 ▪ certain amounts derived from the disposal of fishing quota emission units other than by surrender — see s CX 51C ▪ refunds from a person’s environmental restoration account — see s CX 52 and ¶10-412 ▪ credits for inflation-indexed instruments that are a recovery of an earlier decrease that was previously debited to the lender — see s CX 53 and ¶5-055 ▪ share-lending collateral derived under a share-lending arrangement — see s CX 54 and ¶5-288 ▪ certain amounts derived on the transfer of an emissions unit under an excepted financial arrangement — see s CX 54B and ¶5-228 ▪ income derived by a portfolio investment entity (PIE), the Crown as owner of the New Zealand Superannuation Fund or the VCF, a Fund investment vehicle (as referred to in s 59A of the New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Income Act 2001) or a VCF investment vehicle (as referred to in s 25 of the Venture Capital Fund Act 2019) that is treated as being wholly owned by the Crown under s HR 4B, a company that is treated as being wholly owned by the Crown under s HR 4B, or a life insurer from the sale of shares in a New Zealand company or an Australian listed company where the share is not a non-participating redeemable preference share — see s CX 55 and ¶29-130 ▪ certain amounts derived by a foreign PIE equivalent from the disposal of a share or financial arrangement — see s CX 55B ▪ certain amounts of attributed PIE income derived by an investor (who is not a zero-rated investor) from an interest in a multi-rate  PIE — see s CX 56 and ¶29-145 ▪ distributions or dividends derived by an investor from a multi-rate PIE — see s CX 56B and ¶29-145 ▪ distributions or dividends derived by a resident investor (who is a natural person or trustee who has not included the amount as income in a return for the income year) from a listed PIE — see s CX 56C and ¶29-145 ▪ credits for fees attributed to investors by a multi-rate PIE if the payment is included as taxable income of the multi-rate PIE — see s CX 57 and ¶29-145 ▪ amounts other than FIF income derived from an attributing interest in an FIF during a period in which a calculation method referred to in s EX 59(1) was used — see s CX 57B ▪ minor beneficiary income — see s CX 58 and ¶25-045 ▪ taxable distributions derived from non-complying trusts — see s CX 59 and ¶25-305 ▪ certain income derived by a consolidated group company from a transaction with another company in the same group — see s CX 60 and ¶20-040 ▪ amounts treated as excluded income under the avoidance arrangement provisions of ss GA 1 and GB 23 — see s CX 61 ▪ amounts treated as excluded income of partners resulting from the application of subpart HG — see s CX 62 and ¶23-050 ▪ certain dividends derived from a company after it has ceased to be a look-through company — see s CX 63 and ¶19-230 ▪ amounts treated as excluded income under subpart FH (Hybrid and branch mismatches of deductions and income from multijurisdictional arrangements) — see s CX 64 and ¶26-650.  Law: IT07 subpart CX  ¶5-760 Excluded income — grants and subsidies Certain government grants or subsidies paid to a person for a business that the person carries on are excluded income. To be excluded income, the payment must: ▪ be made by a local authority (see ¶5-610) or a public authority (see ¶5-605) ▪ be in the nature of a grant or subsidy, or be a grant-related suspensory loan, and ▪ not be in the nature of an advance or loan (other than a grantrelated suspensory loan), and ▪ correspond to: □ expenditure the person incurs for which they would be allowed a deduction but for s DF 1 (Government grants to businesses), or □ expenditure the person incurs in acquiring, constructing, installing or extending an asset for which the person would have an amount of depreciation loss but for s DF 1. A grant-related suspensory loan is a loan made by: ▪ a public authority (excluding a specified suspensory loan that would, if remitted, be income of the person — see ¶5-320) and includes the term that the liability of the borrower may be wholly or partly remitted, or ▪ the Rural Banking and Finance Corporation of New Zealand as an irrigation suspensory loan and designated as such, or ▪ the Rural Banking and Finance Corporation of New Zealand as a West Coast drainage suspensory loan and designated as such.  The exclusion from income in s CX 47 does not apply to: ▪ grants made under the Agriculture Recovery Programme for the Lower North Island and Eastern Bay of Plenty, to the extent that the grant relates to expenditure incurred before the grant was received and for which a deduction would be allowed but for s DF 1 (see s CX 47(3)), or ▪ a person who has chosen to exclude a grant payment to the extent to which it is made to the person for the person’s business as a research and development growth grant, the payment is withheld until the conditions of the grant are satisfied, and in the absence of s DF 1 the person would have been allowed a deduction for expenditure or depreciation loss to which the payment corresponds. See s CX 47(4). The amount of a person’s deduction for expenditure incurred that has been financed out of a grant or loan meeting the above criteria is restricted — see ¶10-513. This restriction and the exclusion from income of the amount of the loan places the person in a tax-neutral position. For a specific discussion on the COVID-19 wage subsidy, see ¶5765. Law: IT07 ss CX 47, DF 1, YA 1  ¶5-765 Excluded income — COVID-19 subsidies and payments COVID-19 wage subsidy On 17 March 2020, Finance Minister Grant Robertson announced the coalition Government’s stimulus package to cushion the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus (also known as the coronavirus). The $12.1 billion package, described as “the most significant peace-time economic plan in modern New Zealand history”, included a wage subsidy scheme, as well as other income support and tax relief measures.  The Government introduced the wage subsidy scheme to assist businesses adversely impacted by COVID-19 to keep their workers in employment. To qualify, the business must have experienced a 30% decline in revenue (actual or predicted) that is related to COVID-19 for any four weeks between 1 January and 9 June 2020 compared to the year before. An extension of the wage subsidy was later announced by the Government. An application for the wage subsidy extension can be made from 10 June 2020 to 1 September 2020. To qualify, businesses must have had, or expect to have, a revenue loss of at least 40% for a continuous 30-day period within the 40 days before they apply (but no earlier than 10 May 2020), compared to the closest period last year. It will be paid for eight weeks per employee at the same rate as the initial wage subsidy (see below for relevant rates). (Note that the extension of the wage subsidy was originally announced by the Government as part of its Budget 2020 measures. Those announcements required a business to have had a 50% revenue loss in the 30 days immediately before they applied to be eligible for the extended subsidy. However, these terms were loosened to those specified above by further announcements by the Government on 5 June 2020.) In addition to the relevant decline in revenue, the business must: ▪ be physically located in New Zealand ▪ be registered with the NZ Companies Office (if the business/employer is a company) ▪ have employees who are legally working in New Zealand ▪ have taken active steps to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 before making the application (including but not limited to engaging with their bank, drawing on cash reserves as appropriate and making an insurance claim), and ▪ endeavour to retain the named employees using its best efforts for the period of the subsidy.  Sole traders, self-employed persons, companies, registered charities, non-government organisations, incorporated societies and post-settlement governance entities are eligible to apply for the subsidy. The amount of the subsidy is: ▪ $585.80 per week for a full-time employee (20 hours or more), and ▪ $350.00 per week for a part-time employee (less than 20 hours). The payment is made by the Ministry of Social Development as a lump sum to the employer, being $7,029.60 for a full-time employee and $4,200 for a part-time employee for the original wage subsidy, and $4,686.40 for a full-time employee and $2,800 for a part-time employee for the extended wage subsidy. On 27 March, the Government introduced additional obligations for employers applying for the subsidy, such as the requirement to gain an employee’s written consent to any changes to their employment agreement. These obligations, together with detailed information on the subsidy, can be found on the work and income website. Resurgence wage subsidy In August 2020, the Government announced a 2-week COVID-19 Resurgence Wage Subsidy payment would be available for those financially impacted by the resurgence of COVID-19 and the changes to COVID Alert levels. Although the resurgence occurred in Auckland, the resurgence wage subsidy is available for employers throughout New Zealand. However, it is only available for employers who are not already getting the wage subsidy, the wage subsidy extension or the leave support scheme for their employee. To be eligible, a business must have experienced, or be projected to experience, a 40% revenue drop across a 14-day period between 12 August and 10 September when compared to a similar period in 2019. Other eligibility criteria are the same as for the wage subsidy extension.  The subsidy is for 2 weeks from the day the application is submitted and is paid as a lump sum. The rate is the same as the wage subsidy set out above. Applications opened for the resurgence wage subsidy at 1pm on 21 August 2020 and closed at 11.59pm on 3 September 2020. Tax treatment of the subsidy The wage subsidy is excluded income to the employer under s CX 47. Therefore, it is not required to be included in the employer’s tax return. However, the employer will be denied a deduction for the portion of the wages paid to an employee covered by the wage subsidy (s DF 1). The employer must continue to withhold the relevant PAYE, KiwiSaver, child support and student loan deductions from the salary or wages covered by the subsidy in the usual way. The wage subsidy amount is included and returned as a gross amount in an employee’s pay, not a net amount. It is taxable remuneration for the employee. If an individual receives the wage subsidy as a lump sum instead of weekly payments, there may be tax implications if the amount was received before 31 March 2020. The lump sum is treated as earned when it is received. Therefore, if the lump sum was received before 31 March 2020, the full amount will be included in the 2020 income year, despite being income that would normally have been earned in the 2021 income year. This could have the following implications for an employee: ▪ They may be moved into a higher tax bracket, which may result in a year-end tax bill. ▪ If, as a result of receiving the additional income, their total income before tax for the year exceeds $48,000, the person will no longer qualify for the independent earner tax credit. ▪ The additional income may impact entitlements to Working for Families Tax Credits.  ▪ There may be student loan implications for underpaying in relation to the amount of income received. Note that the tax-free treatment for employers receiving the wage subsidy for their employees does not apply to self-employed people who receive the subsidy for their personal loss of income. The subsidy will only be excluded income for a self-employed person to the extent it is used by them to subsidise wages of their employees. Note also that, generally, GST-registered businesses receiving government grants and subsidy payments are required to return GST on payments received. However, COVID-19 wage subsidies have been added to the schedule of non-taxable grants and subsidies in the Goods and Services Tax (Grants and Subsidies) Order 1992. See ¶32-023. An employer, therefore, is not liable for GST on the subsidy received. Example — Stef’s Jet Skis Ltd Stef’s Jet Skis Ltd offers boat tours in Queenstown. It employs 5 full-time staff and 10 part-time staff. Its main customers are international tourists. As a result of COVID-19, it has seen a significant reduction in bookings and, with the closing of the borders, expects this to get worse over the coming months. Stef’s Jet Skis Ltd is eligible for the wage subsidy. When it applies for the subsidy, it receives a $75,158 lump-sum payment from the Ministry of Social Development (MSD). It is required to pass the subsidy on to its employees. It is not: ▪ liable for income tax on the subsidy received, as this is excluded income ▪ required to account for GST on the subsidy received, or ▪ entitled to an income tax deduction in relation to the portion of wages paid funded by the wage subsidy. Stef’s Jet Skis Ltd can now afford to pay its staff the equivalent of their regular wage. The subsidy is included and processed in the company’s ordinary payroll with the relevant KiwiSaver, child support, student loan and PAYE deductions withheld. Example from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 19 May 2020.  Audit process  Employees, who believe their workplace is accessing the wage subsidy scheme but not meeting the conditions it agreed to, can make a complaint to Employment New Zealand (Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)). The government is also prioritising the audit process for businesses for which complaints have been laid. A dedicated Ministry of Social Development team (overseen by a team of fraud experts and investigators) is working with Inland Revenue and MBIE in relation to this audit process. Applicants for the subsidy who provide false or misleading information could be subject to civil proceedings for amounts received that they were not entitled to and/or prosecuted for offences under the Crimes Act. COVID-19 resurgence support payment (CRSP) scheme In December 2020, the government announced a package to support businesses and individuals in the event of a change in COVID-19 alert levels. The package contained a proposal for a one-off resurgence support payment that businesses affected by any resurgence of COVID-19 in the community could apply to Inland Revenue for. The proposed package was included in legislation passed under urgency in Parliament and enacted on 18 February 2021. The COVID-19 resurgence support payment (CRSP) scheme provides for a one-off support payment to businesses in the form of a grant. The amount an applicant may receive under the scheme is the lower of: ▪ a base amount of $1,500 per applicant plus $400 per full-time equivalent worker (FTE) up to a total of 50 FTEs (although businesses with more than 50 FTEs may still apply), and ▪ four times the amount the applicant’s revenue has declined by. To be eligible for the grant, applicants must have suffered a decline in revenue of 30% or more. This is calculated by comparing a sevenday period at alert level 2 or higher with the typical weekly revenue in the six weeks preceding the move from alert level 1. Applicants must also have been in business for at least six months.  The CRSP scheme may be activated in the event of an increase in alert levels from alert level 1 to alert level 2 or higher, and after remaining at an alert level higher than 1 for seven days or more. It will be available to all New Zealand businesses (regardless of whether the particular region a business is located in has been affected by an increase in alert levels), each time the scheme activates. The Commissioner must set out the procedure required for a person to make an application for the grant and determine the eligibility requirements to qualify. The Commissioner must also set the terms and conditions of the grant. The grant, together with other amounts such as interest and penalties, must be repaid if a person receives the grant despite not meeting the eligibility criteria or if the terms and conditions of the grant are breached. The Commissioner will be able to use collection procedures under s 157 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to ensure that the amount is recovered. The CRSP scheme is activated by an Order in Council.  The COVID-19 Resurgence Support Payments Scheme (February 2021) Order 2021 activated the scheme on 23 February 2021 and provided that the scheme would operate from 23 February 2021 until one month after all areas of New Zealand returned to alert level 1. Additional COVID-19 support payments Additional financial support for the effects of COVID-19 is available from Work and Income in the form of the following: ▪ COVID-19 short-term absence payment, which helps businesses pay their employees who cannot work from home while they wait for a COVID-19 test result. This payment is also available to self-employed people. ▪ COVID-19 leave support scheme, which provides for employees and self-employed people to receive an income if they cannot work from home while they are self-isolating. For further information on these and other forms of financial support administered by Work and Income, see the Work and Income website. Law: IT07 ss CX 47, DF 1; TAA ss 7AAB, 7AAC  FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS Introduction to the financial arrangements rules ¶6-010 Application of Financial Arrangements Rules  ¶6-020  Spreading Methods  ¶6-102  Base Price Adjustment  ¶6-358  Avoidance Provisions  ¶6-550  Determinations  ¶6-600  Finance Leases  ¶6-700  Hire Purchase Agreements  ¶6-740  ¶6-010 Introduction to the financial arrangements rules The financial arrangements rules comprise the following statutory provisions: ▪ subpart EW ▪ ss CC 3 (financial arrangements income), DB 11–DB 15 (financial arrangements adjustments), EZ 51 (transitional adjustment), FB 9 (relationship property agreements), GB 21 (avoidance provisions), and RA 11 and RA 12 (RWT and NRWT) ▪ ss 90AA–90AD of the Tax Administration Act 1994. For a flow chart summarising the spreading methods available for financial arrangements under the rules, see ¶6-125. Purposes  The purposes of the financial arrangements rules are explained in s EW 1(3) to be: ▪ to require the parties to a financial arrangement to accrue, over the term of the arrangement, a fair and reasonable amount of income derived or expenditure incurred under the arrangement and so prevent the deferral of income or the advancement of expenditure ▪ to require the parties to a financial arrangement to disregard any distinction between capital and revenue amounts, and ▪ to require a party to a financial arrangement to calculate a base price adjustment when the rights and the obligations of the party under the arrangement cease. A financial arrangement is an arrangement under which there is a deferral of the payment of consideration. A person receives money in consideration for money to be provided in the future. Prominent examples include a loan relationship and the sale and purchase of an asset or service if there is any deferral in the payment of the purchase price. An excepted financial arrangement is not a financial arrangement. An example of an excepted financial arrangement is an equity investment. The first purpose of the financial arrangements rules, of accruing income and expenditure on a fair and reasonable basis, is accomplished by the application of one of several prescribed spreading methods to the financial arrangement. These methods allocate an appropriate portion of total income and expenditure generated from the financial arrangement to each income year of the arrangement’s term. The yield to maturity method is the primary spreading method where there is certainty of the expected cash flows and payment dates. An example of when the yield to maturity method cannot be applied is an instrument that provides for a floating rate of interest.  The operation of spreading methods is recognised in the core provisions. Under s BD 3, income is allocated to the income year in which it is derived, although it is acknowledged that regimes in Pt E modify the allocation of income and allocate income as part of the process of quantifying it. Similarly, s BD 4 provides that a deduction for an expenditure or loss is allocated to the income year in which it is incurred, although Pt E contains provisions that modify the allocation of deductions and allocate deductions as part of the process of quantifying them. These sections describe, in general terms, the effect of the financial arrangements rules. Significantly, the second part of the first purpose, about allocating income and expenditure on a fair and reasonable basis, is not a concept that is applied to all financial arrangements. A person who is classified as a cash basis person is not required to adopt a spreading method. The consequence is that income and expenditure under the person’s financial arrangements is recognised on a cash, or realised, basis. The third purpose of undertaking a base price adjustment occurs when a financial arrangement is sold or repaid. The base price adjustment is in the nature of a “wash up” calculation, designed to reveal any previously unrecognised income or expenditure from the financial arrangement. The base price adjustment is incorporated in a formula that compares all consideration paid with all consideration received. The calculation will, for example, bring to account any interest paid or received in the income year in which a loan is repaid. If amounts owing under the financial arrangement have been forgiven, the calculation will also result in the forgiveness being treated as income in the hands of the borrower. This is unless the release of debt was in the family context of “in consideration of natural love and affection”. To take account of all consideration paid or received reflects the second purpose of the financial arrangements rules: to disregard the distinction between capital and revenue. That approach ensures, for example, that financial arrangement income includes any gain achieved upon the profitable disposal of a debt investment held on capital account.  The Commissioner may issue determinations for the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. The topics that may be covered include spreading methods and the separation of a financial arrangement and an excepted financial arrangement where there is a close association between the two. The Commissioner may initiate a determination, or a person may apply for one to cover a specific transaction. The financial arrangements rules have what may be regarded as elusive qualities. The main objective of the rules may perhaps be regarded as an imposition of the requirement to apply a spreading method to a financial arrangement. However, the cash basis person concept must in practice create a very large exemption. The financial arrangements rules also potentially include within their scope transactions for the sale and purchase of assets and services, but such transactions, typically, do not give rise to periodic cashflows susceptible to the application of a spreading method. The everyday purchase of a personal residence, for example, is unlikely to require the application of a spreading method. The explanation for the inclusion of property transactions in the financial arrangements rules may perhaps lie in the objective of ascertaining whether a purchase price includes a component for capitalised interest. Whether there is a fair balance between the likely incidence of such transactions and the complex regime enacted to deal with them is not obvious. Historical background The financial arrangements rules have undergone several rewrites and revisions over the years, including being renamed. The table below summarises the different regimes that have operated. When financial arrangement entered into: after 19 May 1999  Regime name: financial arrangements rules (also referred to as accrual rules and division 2 rules). See subpart EW.  When financial arrangement entered into: on or after 31 July 1986 and before 20 May 1999  Regime name: old financial arrangements rules (also referred to as division 1 rules, accruals rules and qualified accruals rules). See ss EZ 33–EZ 52.  The purchaser of an old financial arrangement after 19 May 1999 becomes subject to the financial arrangements rules. Law: IT07 ss BD 3, BD 4, EW 1, EZ 33  APPLICATION OF FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS RULES ¶6-020 Relationship of financial arrangements rules to other provisions The financial arrangements rules prevail over any other provision for the timing and quantifying of income and expenditure under a financial arrangement. This is unless the other provision expressly, or by necessary implication, requires otherwise. In addition, cost for various regimes does not include expenditure under a financial arrangement that is subject to the financial arrangements rules. Financial arrangement expenditure is not included in: ▪ the cost of trading stock for low-turnover traders of trading stock (including dealer’s livestock); see ¶9-006 ▪ the cost of livestock ▪ the cost of bloodstock ▪ the cost of revenue account property  ▪ the cost of timber ▪ the cost of acquiring a film or a film right ▪ film production expenditure ▪ petroleum development expenditure, and ▪ petroleum exploration expenditure. These exclusions may be regarded as ensuring that an outlay does not result in two deductions. The exclusions ensure, for example, that interest allowed as a deduction under the financial arrangements rules cannot be capitalised and included as part of the cost base of revenue account property. The financial arrangements rules may determine the value of property acquired or disposed of under a financial arrangement. Under s EW 35, the acquisition or disposal value is the value as determined under the financial arrangements rules. Example: SC Ltd purchases an item of plant for a total of $500,000. That price includes capitalised interest of $25,000. Under the financial arrangements rules, the lowest price of the plant is $475,000. The depreciable cost of the plant for SC Ltd similarly becomes $475,000.  Law: IT07 ss EW 2, EW 35  ¶6-026 Scope of the financial arrangements rules The financial arrangements rules apply to a financial arrangement: ▪ that all its parties enter into after 19 May 1999 ▪ existing immediately before 20 May 1999 to the extent to which a person becomes a party to the arrangement after 19 May 1999  ▪ that is rolled over or extended, or under which an advance is made, after 19 May 1999, under a binding contract entered into before 20 May 1999 ▪ to the extent to which the transferee becomes a party to it where: □ the transferor is a party to it before 20 May 1999 □ it is rolled over or extended, or an advance is made under it, after 19 May 1999, under a binding contract entered into before 20 May 1999, and □ it is transferred under a relationship agreement after 19 May 1999. There are exclusions from the financial arrangements rules for a financial arrangement where: ▪ all parties enter into the financial arrangement after 19 May 1999, under a binding contract entered into before 20 May 1999, or ▪ all its parties enter into the financial arrangement after 19 May 1999, under a binding contract entered into before 20 May 1999 and the financial arrangement is transferred under a relationship agreement after 19 May 1999. If the financial arrangements rules do not apply, the financial arrangement continues to be subject to the old financial arrangements rules in ss EZ 33–EZ 52. If the old financial arrangements rules apply, a person can elect to apply the financial arrangements rules by calculating a transitional adjustment under s EZ 51. A person who is a party to a financial arrangement that is subject to the financial arrangements rules must calculate and allocate income or expenditure under the arrangement for an income year under those rules. Law: IT07 ss EW 10, EZ 33, EZ 34, EZ 51(1)  ¶6-030 Exclusions from financial arrangements rules The financial arrangements rules do not apply to: ▪ the calculation of resident passive income ▪ the calculation of non-resident passive income (other than nonresident financial arrangement income or income derived under a notional loan under s FG 3), and ▪ use of money interest paid to or by the Commissioner. Thus, the financial arrangements rules do not apply to some interest regimes, eg the calculation of resident passive income and nonresident passive income, ensuring interest under both regimes is ascertained on a cash basis rather than an accrual basis. Note that, with effect from 30 March 2017, there are exceptions for nonresident financial arrangement income and for a notional loan to the New Zealand branch of a foreign bank (see ¶26-440). The financial arrangements rules generally apply to a non-resident only to the extent that the non-resident is a party to a financial arrangement for a business carried on by the non-resident through a fixed establishment in New Zealand. Effectively, this means that the rules apply to a non-resident who operates a branch business in New Zealand and who borrows or invests in financial arrangements for that business. Under the controlled foreign company regime outlined in ¶26-038, the financial arrangements rules would have application to the shareholder of a non-resident company. The financial arrangements rules may also apply to a non-resident trustee of a non-complying trust. This extension of the financial arrangements rules envisages a trust with a settlor resident in New Zealand, which derives foreign-sourced income from investments made by the non-resident trustee. The extension ensures that the settlor’s tax liability is calculated as if trustee income was subject to New Zealand tax rules. Law: IT07 ss EW 9, EW 11  ¶6-045 Financial arrangements defined A financial arrangement is an arrangement under which a person receives money in consideration for that person, or another person, providing money to any person: ▪ at a future time, or ▪ on the occurrence or non-occurrence of a future event, irrespective of whether the event occurs because notice is, or is not, given. The concept of an arrangement is very broad. It encompasses an agreement, contract, plan, or understanding, whether it is enforceable or not, including all steps and transactions by which it is carried into effect. However, there are limits to the breadth of the concept. For example, not every stated prediction of probable future conduct is an arrangement in the form of an understanding. For there to be an understanding, there must be a statement of intent that is unequivocal and unqualified. See GPO Holdings Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,429. Without limiting the generality of the definition, the concept of a financial arrangement includes: ▪ a debt, including a debt that arises by law ▪ a debt instrument ▪ the deferral of the payment of some or all of the consideration for an absolute assignment of some or all of a person’s rights under another financial arrangement or under an excepted financial arrangement, and ▪ the deferral of the payment of some or all of the consideration for a legal defeasance releasing a person from some or all of their obligations under another financial arrangement or under an excepted financial arrangement.  A financial arrangement also includes an excepted financial arrangement (see ¶6-065) that ceases to have that classification. An excepted financial arrangement can cease to be so classified where: ▪ the excepted financial arrangement is one of the following kinds that the person stops using for a private or domestic purpose: □ a cash basis person who is a borrower under a foreign currency loan □ an option to acquire or dispose of property that is not a financial arrangement □ an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or a specified option that must be settled within 365 days and is for a value that is less than $1m for real property or $400,000 for other property or services ▪ the excepted financial arrangement is one of the following kind that the person elects to treat as a financial arrangement and the expenditure under the agreements satisfies the general permission and is not denied by a general limitation as a deduction of the person: □ an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services if prepayments under all such agreements do not exceed $50,000 □ a short-term agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services □ a short-term option □ travellers’ cheques □ a variable principal debt instrument if the value of all such instruments do not exceed $50,000 ▪ the excepted financial arrangement is an interest-free loan in New Zealand currency, repayable on demand, that the person  elects to treat as a financial arrangement. For the first category, the excepted financial arrangement becomes a financial arrangement on the day on which the person stops using it for a private or domestic purpose. Upon becoming a financial arrangement, a spreading method must be applied and a base price adjustment calculated upon disposal or maturity of the financial arrangement. No guidance is given for determining when the excepted financial arrangement ceases to be used for a private or domestic purpose. This is a question of fact. Example 1: Mr KP is a motor vehicle dealer who raises a USD loan to purchase a Humvee vehicle and uses it for private motoring. Six months later, Mr KP decides to sell the vehicle through his business. The USD loan becomes a financial arrangement probably at the point at which Mr KP starts to display the vehicle for sale.  The second category is provided for in s EW 8(1)(a). That section was amended in 2013, with effect from 27 September 2012, to apply only to a person carrying on a business of acquiring short-term agreements for sale and purchase to collect amounts owing at the time of acquisition. The person could then choose to treat all such acquired agreements as financial arrangements. However, the amendment was later repealed in 2014 and the original provision was restored. An additional amendment added the requirement for the expenditure to satisfy the general permission and not be denied a deduction by a general limitation, with effect from 17 July 2013. A savings provision preserves an election made under s EW 8 as amended in 2013, provided a tax position was taken in a return received by the Commissioner, or a determination or binding ruling made by the Commissioner, before 14 April 2014 and the person chose to continue to take that tax position after that date. Note, however, that at the time s EW 8 was amended in 2013, an additional amendment inserted s ED 4 and that section remains.  That section provides that when a taxpayer has one of the five excepted financial arrangements listed above that is denominated in a foreign currency, they may choose to value any debts outstanding under the excepted financial arrangement at the same spot exchange rate they use in preparing financial statements. This rule is optional, but once a taxpayer elects into the rule for an excepted financial arrangement, they must continue to apply the rule to all of their excepted financial arrangements that are of the same type. A taxpayer’s decision to elect into the rule will be reflected in the tax position they take in their return of income for the year. No prior notice of election is required. An election under s EW 8 is made by preparing the tax return for the year of election on the basis that the excepted financial arrangements are financial arrangements. That involves the application of a spreading method to the financial arrangements. A category-by-category approach may be adopted or a class approach for short-term agreements. The election does not need to be made for all categories or classes that are potentially subject to an election. An election may be revoked. The revocation is achieved by giving the Commissioner notice of the revocation within the time allowed for the filing of the tax return for the year in which the notice of revocation is given. The revocation applies prospectively, extending to excepted financial arrangements entered into after the year of election. Financial arrangement treatment would continue to apply to those financial arrangements held at the end of the year of revocation, until such time as they are sold or they mature. Consideration The definition of a financial arrangement refers to a receipt of money “in consideration for” money to be provided in the future. The notion of consideration for these purposes is not defined. Some reference can be made to the general principles on the meaning of the concept. Consideration is a feature of every contract. To be a contract, the agreement in question must be supported by consideration. Under the law of contract, consideration, as traditionally conceived, involves  either some detriment to the promisee or some benefit to the promisor. An alternative definition adopted by the House of Lords is that consideration is the price for which the promise of the other is bought. See Dunlop v Selfridge [1915] AC 847. These propositions were outlined by the High Court in Cooper v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,216. This case concerned the construction of a loan agreement that provided that the borrowers would be discharged from all liabilities under the loan, if the lender became insolvent. In due course, the lender became insolvent and was wound up. The Court held that the borrowers had been discharged from making all remaining loan payments without consideration. The Court made no reference to the alternative possibility that consideration had been provided when the loan was entered into. At that time, the lender agreed to discharge the borrowers upon the lender’s insolvency, and it was not explained why it was necessary that the borrowers should give additional consideration to obtain the discharge when insolvency eventuated. There is an element of reciprocity in the concept of consideration. No such element was found to be present for GST purposes where a corporate body for a time share resort merely collected contributions from its members and passed them on. See Taupo Ika Nui Body Corporate v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,147. It is not every benefit or advantage that accompanies or follows a disposition that can be regarded as consideration. There must be an element of bargain that ties the benefit to the disposition. The benefit must be given in return for the disposition and be enforceable by the disponor. See the gift duty case of Baigent v C of IR (1979) 4 NZTC 61,628 (CA). The concept of consideration for stamp duty purposes was held, in one case, to be what the vendor of an asset receives to transfer the asset to the purchaser. This was in the context of a case that concerned the dutiable value of an agreement for the sale and purchase of shares, the agreement also providing that the target company would pay a pre-settlement dividend to its shareholder as vendor. A majority of the High Court of Australia held that the amount  of the dividend should be taken into account in computing the consideration. Receipt of the dividend was part of the payments that induced the vendor to transfer the shares it held in the target company. The minority of the Court thought that the consideration for the dividend was provided upon the original subscription for share capital in the target company. When the shares were subscribed for, the subscription was in consideration of the company’s promise to apply its assets in various ways, such as by paying dividends. See Chief Commr of State Revenue (NSW) v Dick Smith Electronics Holdings Pty Ltd 2005 ATC 4052. The Commissioner discussed the concept of consideration in the course of addressing the question of whether school fees and activity fees paid to a state school attract GST. See BR Pub 18/06, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 3. What is not a financial arrangement Under s EW 4, some transactions are not a financial arrangement. An absolute assignment of some or all of a person’s rights under a financial arrangement or excepted financial arrangement is not a financial arrangement. This is provided that there is no deferral of payment of any of the consideration for the assignment. A legal defeasance that releases a person from some or all obligations under a financial arrangement or an excepted financial arrangement is not a financial arrangement. This is provided that there is no deferral of payment of any of the consideration for the defeasance. The notion of a legal defeasance encompasses the release from the primary obligation owed under a financial arrangement that is formally acknowledged or established by legal judgment. These exclusions may be regarded as confirmatory in nature, because the absence of deferral indicates that the assignment or defeasance would not have been within the scope of the definition of a financial arrangement. Composite financial arrangement  The concept of a financial arrangement may raise the question of whether two or more associated agreements are one financial arrangement. For example, the everyday purchase of a residential property may be pursuant to an agreement containing a “subject to finance” clause. The linkage between purchase of the residence and financing of the purchase raises the question of whether the agreements should be classified as one financial arrangement. A commodity exporter who sold wool on a forward basis in a foreign currency entered into two contracts. One was for the sale of wool and the other was a forward foreign exchange contract providing for the sale of the foreign currency in exchange for a fixed amount of New Zealand dollars. To treat the two agreements as separate financial arrangements when they spanned a balance date produced a mismatch at balance date involving unrealised gains on the foreign exchange contract but no corresponding loss on the wool sale contract (neutrality between the two would not be achieved until the contracts concluded after the balance date). The Court of Appeal held that the wool sale contract and the forward foreign exchange contract could not be regarded as one financial arrangement. The wool purchaser was not a party to the foreign exchange contract and was not likely to even know of it. The bank was not a party to the wool contract. The consideration in each contract moved to and from a party that had no connection with the other contract, so there was no interaction or interdependence. See C of IR v Dewavrin Segard (NZ) Ltd (1994) 16 NZTC 11,048 (CA). The Commissioner commented that this case showed that, for two or more arrangements to be taken as part of a composite financial arrangement, there must be some interdependence. That interdependence must be present not only in terms of the parties involved in the transaction, but also in terms of the consideration passing under each arrangement: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 6, July 1999 at 10. A shareholder’s guarantee of a loan to his company, together with the loan, was not regarded as one financial arrangement. Both the guarantee and loan agreements were treated as separate, so that the consideration payable under the loan agreement did not supply  consideration for the guarantee. See McElwee v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,288. Consideration for the release of a debt owed under a loan, if any, must be supplied by the loan agreement itself and not by an associated agreement, such as an option agreement for the possible purchase of livestock, that the parties had also entered into. See Cooper v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,216. Example 2: Mrs GL enters into a contract to purchase a residence for $750,000 on “subject to finance” terms. Mrs GL raises finance from A Bank Ltd and a second mortgage from the vendor. The agreement for the purchase of the residence can be classified as an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services entered into for private or domestic purposes that is an excepted financial arrangement. Is the transaction to be analysed as one financial arrangement or as three financial arrangements comprising the purchase and two contracts of loan? Classification as one financial arrangement would be based on the notion that there is a plan carried into effect by the three agreements. Classification as three financial arrangements would be based on the proposition that there is no interaction or interdependence between the three contracts. The consideration under each of them is confined to each agreement and does not move from one agreement to another. The contract for sale and purchase, for example, is independent of the contract of loan between the vendor and the purchaser. Each agreement contains its own self-contained series of promises and mere temporal association between them may be insufficient to create interdependence. The absence of interdependence of consideration suggests the presence of three financial arrangements. Treatment as one financial arrangement may also result in an anomalous outcome. As one financial arrangement, there would be the possibility of classification as an excepted financial arrangement because of the purchase of the residence as the dominant feature of the arrangement. That would be an anomalous result because of the presence of loan agreements that without doubt should be subject to the financial arrangements rules.  Law: IT07 ss ED 4, EW 3, EW 4, EW 7, EW 8, YA 1  ¶6-065 Excepted financial arrangements defined An excepted financial arrangement is not a financial arrangement. If not classified as a financial arrangement, it is not necessary to apply a spreading method or to calculate a base price adjustment upon maturity or sale.  A schedular approach is adopted in defining what is an excepted financial arrangement. The concept of an excepted financial arrangement comprises a list of various transactions. The transactions are so included with no consistent theme beyond inclusion for policy reasons or to ensure harmony with other taxation regimes. A prominent category of excepted financial arrangement encompasses shares. As a consequence, the financial arrangements rules can be seen to govern the taxation of debt instruments and not equity investments. Certain excepted financial arrangements may become financial arrangements if the person makes an election for that treatment, see ¶6-045. For a discussion on the valuation of excepted financial arrangements that are revenue account property see ¶9-060. Annuity An annuity is an excepted financial arrangement to the extent to which it is not life financial reinsurance (as defined in s EY 12) where the annuity is: ▪ for a term contingent on human life, or ▪ for a term not contingent on human life, but which is offered as part of a business of life insurance. Bet An excepted financial arrangement includes a bet on: ▪ a horse race ▪ a sports event, or ▪ gambling. Emissions unit An emissions unit, as defined in s YA 1 (see ¶5-228), is an excepted financial arrangement. See ¶9-062 for the valuation rules relating to  emissions units. Note that a number of amendments have been made to deal with the securitisation of pre-1990 forest land emissions units through a sale and compulsory buy-back transaction. This transaction is effectively a lease of the units in exchange for a loan. The transaction is treated as a financial arrangement with an attached excepted financial arrangement. The excepted financial arrangement is the assignment of the pre-1990 forest land emissions units by the holder to a person who is not an associated person (the lender) and the later assignment of the same or other New Zealand emissions units by the lender to the holder. Thus, the financial arrangements rules apply to the “interest” component only. See further at ¶5-228. Greenhouse gas unit A greenhouse gas unit (as defined in s YA 1) that is not an emissions unit is an excepted financial arrangement. Note that prior to 30 November 2020, a non-Kyoto greenhouse gas unit was an excepted financial arrangement. Research and development agreement An agreement between two parties for the provision of property or services in consideration for a payment under a research and development growth grant (prior to 30 March 2017, a technology development grant or technology transfer voucher) is an excepted financial arrangement. Employment contract An employment contract is an excepted financial arrangement. This category of excepted financial arrangement gives no guidance to the classification of transactions that may flow out of an employment contract. An employment contract may perhaps be regarded as the provision of remuneration, such as salary, fringe benefits and superannuation contributions, in exchange for services. Additional transactions, such as the provision of finance on favourable terms, may be regarded as a separate transaction despite its antecedents in the contract of employment. There is an absence of interdependence of consideration between the  employment contract and the contract of loan, because each is capable of operating independently of the other. Farm-out arrangement A farm-out arrangement is an excepted financial arrangement. A farm-out arrangement is one that involves the provision of services or finance for petroleum or mineral exploration activities in return for a share in the activity or any success generated from the project. Group investment fund interest An interest in a group investment fund is an excepted financial arrangement. A group investment fund is a fund established under the Public Trust Act 2001, the Trustee Companies Act 1967 or the Public Trust Office Act 1957. A group investment fund is treated as an equity investment arrangement for income tax purposes. It is appropriate that the financial arrangements rules do not apply. Hire purchase of livestock or bloodstock A hire purchase agreement for livestock or bloodstock is an excepted financial arrangement. For this purpose, a hire purchase agreement is one of the following: ▪ an agreement for the hire of goods, with an option to purchase ▪ an agreement for the purchase of goods by instalment payments where possession is given before the purchase price is paid in full ▪ an agreement to sell goods at retail under which property in the goods passes to the buyer subject to a security granted by the buyer for payment of the price, and ▪ a sale and loan agreement, where a loan has been advanced to enable the purchase of goods at retail and security over the goods is given.  There are a number of exclusions. An agreement that was not made at retail is not a hire purchase agreement; similarly, an agreement that provides for title to pass at the time it is made or before or upon delivery of the goods. However, if the agreement is one of the first two kinds of agreement listed above, it continues to be classified as a hire purchase agreement. A lay-by sale is not a hire purchase agreement. A feature of a lay-by sale agreement is that the buyer does not receive possession or title to the goods until the price has been paid in full. There is a specific regime relating to the taxation of hire purchase agreements. See further at ¶6-740. Insurance contract An insurance contract is an excepted financial arrangement to the extent to which it is not life financial reinsurance. An insurance contract can include a cover note and the renewal of an insurance contract. The courts have noted that the aim of insurance is to shift risk from one person (the insured) to another (the insurer). There must be an element of uncertainty as to the risk, which may or may not happen, or an event that is certain to happen but at a time that cannot be predicted, and the insured must have an insurable interest in the subject matter. In common with any contract, each party must provide consideration, which, in this instance, will usually be a premium taken in the form of money. The consideration supplied by the insurer is the promise to provide a benefit in exchange for the premium. The insured must have a legal right to the benefit where the claim falls within the terms of the agreement, and the benefit must have some value. See C of IR v Motorcorp Holdings Ltd (2005) 22 NZTC 19,126 (CA). In Sovereign Assurance Company Ltd v C of IR (2012) 25 NZTC ¶20-138, the High Court considered whether commission arrangements under reinsurance contracts were a contract of insurance and therefore an excepted financial arrangement and concluded they were not. The Court held that a payment or payments in the nature of a premium was a necessary element of a  contract of insurance. In addition, the commission arrangements lacked other usual attributes of a contract of insurance and, as a matter of commercial reality, there was no significant transfer of risk to the reinsurers. Lease that is not a finance lease A lease that is not a finance lease is an excepted financial arrangement. For the financial arrangements rules, a lease is generally: ▪ an agreement under which a lessor transfers to a lessee a personal property lease asset in consideration for a personal property lease payment ▪ a sublease ▪ a licence to use intangible property ▪ a hire or bailment ▪ two or more consecutive or successive leases treated by the Commissioner as one lease ▪ an arrangement of the above kinds relating to real property, livestock or bloodstock, or ▪ an occupation right agreement as defined in the Retirement Villages Act 2003. The notion of what constitutes a lease does not include a hire purchase agreement or an assignment of a hire purchase agreement. A personal property lease asset is personal property that is subject to a lease, while a personal property lease payment is consideration in money or money’s worth for such an asset. For a discussion of finance leases, see ¶6-700.  ▸ Note: The Government has agreed to proposed changes that would allow taxpayers with IFRS reporting obligations to more closely follow their accounting treatment of leases for tax purposes, if they choose to do so. The proposed tax changes result from the replacement of the previous accounting standard for leases, New Zealand Equivalent to International Accounting Standard 17 Leases (NZ IAS 17), with New Zealand Equivalent to International Financial Reporting Standard 16 Leases (NZ IFRS 16). NZ IFRS 16 applies to income years starting on or after 1 January 2019. Under NZ IAS 17, there was a difference in the accounting treatment for operating and finance leases for both lessors and lessees. For lessees, NZ IFRS 16 removes the distinction between operating and finance leases for accounting purposes. The proposed changes will apply only for the person using the asset (the lessee), not the person supplying the asset (the lessor). They will also apply only to certain tax operating leases where the lessee makes an irrevocable choice to apply the new provisions. The proposed changes will not affect the boundary between tax operating and finance leases. The proposed rules have been included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, and are intended to apply to taxpayers with IFRS reporting obligations for income years starting on or after 1 January 2019 to align with the commencement of NZ IFRS 16. See further at ¶10-675. Loan in New Zealand currency An excepted financial arrangement for a lender is a loan made in New Zealand currency that is interest free and repayable on demand. Note, however, that a person may elect to treat this excepted financial arrangement as a financial arrangement under s EW 8 (see ¶6-045). A loan of this kind is relatively common in estate-planning arrangements and similar family dealings. In the absence of interest payable to the lender, there would appear to be little merit in  including loans of this kind within the scope of the financial arrangements rules. For the borrower, the loan is subject to the financial arrangements rules, possibly to monitor whether any release of the debt occurs to give rise to income under a base price adjustment calculation. Partnership or joint venture An excepted financial arrangement includes an interest in a partnership or a joint venture. Look-through interest for look-through company A look-through interest for a look-through company is an excepted financial arrangement. Share-lending arrangement An excepted financial arrangement includes a share-lending arrangement. This is to ensure that the financial arrangements rules do not subject to tax any movement in the market value of the shares over the term of a “qualifying” share-lending arrangement. The financial arrangements rules contain a specific provision effectively deeming the ownership of shares under a share-lending arrangement to have always remained with the share supplier for the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. See s EW 52. For a discussion of the tax treatment of distributions under a share-lending arrangement, see ¶17-116. Share or an option over shares An excepted financial arrangement includes a share or an option to acquire or dispose of shares. This does not apply if the shares in question are withdrawable shares. Essentially, a withdrawable share is one issued by a building society specifying at the outset the rate of dividend payable on the share. However, if the share was acquired, or the option entered into, before 19 May 1999, there may be an exclusion under the old financial arrangements rules.  The notion of what is a share for tax purposes is outlined in ¶16-555. The concept encompasses: ▪ any interest in the capital of a company ▪ a profit-related (floating rate) debenture (s FA 2) ▪ a stapled debt security to which s FA 2B(2) applies ▪ a unit in a unit trust ▪ an investor’s interest in a group investment fund where: □ the fund is not a designated group investment fund □ the interest does not result from an investment from a designated source, and □ the interest results from an investment made after 22 June 1983. Prior to 1 April 2015, a debenture in substitution for shares under s FA 2 was also treated as a share. However, from 1 April 2015, a substituting debenture is debt for tax purposes. Any income derived or expenditure incurred under such a debenture is therefore taken into account under the financial arrangements rules from that date. A transitional provision (s EZ 77) applies for substituting debentures already in existence. See ¶16-555. Specified preference share A specified preference share is an excepted financial arrangement. This was a special kind of share that was issued under a contract entered into before 23 October 1986. They were treated as debt for tax purposes. Superannuation A membership of a superannuation scheme is generally an excepted financial arrangement.  A superannuation scheme is a trust established mainly for the purposes of providing retirement benefits to natural persons or paying benefits to superannuation funds. Warranty A warranty for goods or services is an excepted financial arrangement. The Court of Appeal held that a warranty and a sale and purchase agreement for a motor car were one financial arrangement that constituted an excepted financial arrangement. See C of IR v Mitsubishi Motors New Zealand Ltd (1994) 16 NZTC 11,099 (CA). This category, presumably to avoid doubt, prevents the warranty provisions of a contract, or the statutory warranties incorporated in the contract, from becoming a financial arrangement in their own right. Transitional residents An excepted financial arrangement includes an arrangement of a transitional resident, provided the other parties to the arrangement are non-residents and the arrangement is not for the purposes of a business carried on in New Zealand by a party to the arrangement. Loan in a foreign currency for a private or domestic purpose A loan in a foreign currency that is used for a private or domestic purpose, is an excepted financial arrangement for a borrower who is a cash basis person. The courts have said that an outgoing is of a private nature if it is exclusively referable to living as an individual member of society and that domestic expenses are those relating to the household or family unit. See Hunter v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,169 (CA). The loan will change its classification to a financial arrangement if the loan ceases to be used for a private or domestic purpose (see ¶6-045). It is possible that a foreign currency loan raised for an incomeproducing purpose may start to be used for a private or domestic purpose. In that event, a base price adjustment is calculated  immediately before the loan becomes an excepted financial arrangement. Option over property for private or domestic purpose An option to acquire or dispose of property, where the person becomes a party to the option for a private or domestic purpose, is an excepted financial arrangement. However, if the property in question is an interest in a financial arrangement, the option cannot be classified as an excepted financial arrangement. In the event that the option is no longer for a private or domestic purpose, the option ceases to be an excepted financial arrangement and becomes a financial arrangement (see ¶6-045). The converse situation of an option granted for an income-producing purpose that begins to be used for a private or domestic purpose requires a base price adjustment calculation when the option becomes an excepted financial arrangement. Private or domestic agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services An agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or a specified option is an excepted financial arrangement if all of the following apply: ▪ the agreement is entered into by the person, or the option was granted to or by the person for a private or domestic purpose ▪ the subject matter of the agreement or the option is for a purchase price that is less than: □ $1,000,000 for real property □ $400,000 for other property, or □ $400,000 for services, and ▪ settlement of the property or performance of the services is required no later than 365 days:  □ after the date of the agreement, in the case of an agreement for property or services, or □ after the date of the specified option, should an agreement result from exercise of the option. A specified option is an option to acquire or dispose of property or services, and includes any agreement for sale and purchase entered into upon exercise of the option. The notion of property includes all forms of property, with the exception of a financial arrangement and foreign exchange. This category of excepted financial arrangement ceases to have that status if the agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services stops being used for a private or domestic purpose (see ¶6045). A base price adjustment calculation may be required in the converse situation of an agreement originally for an incomeproducing purpose that starts to be used for a private or domestic purpose. Agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services An agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services is an excepted financial arrangement if all sales or purchases are prepaid and the total value of such prepayments under all such agreements throughout the income year does not exceed $50,000. No guidance is given on what constitutes prepayments. Under a contract of general insurance, for example, the year’s premium is usually paid at the beginning of the year of insurance. Usual terms of trade of that kind are not readily regarded as giving rise to a prepayment. This category of excepted financial arrangement does not apply if the person elects to treat the agreements as financial arrangements under s EW 8. Short-term agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services An excepted financial arrangement includes a short-term agreement for sale and purchase. The requirements for classification as a shortterm agreement for sale and purchase are that the agreement is for  the sale and purchase of property or services and provides for one of the following alternatives: ▪ settlement must take place or the services must be performed within 93 days of the date of the agreement ▪ if the date of the agreement is unknown, settlement must take place or the services must be performed within 93 days of the earlier of: □ the date of first payment by the buyer, and □ the date on which the first right in the property is transferred or the services are performed, or ▪ settlement must take place or the services must be performed within 93 days of an invoice date if the agreement is continuous and the seller renders periodic invoices. This category of excepted financial arrangement can be expected to be applicable to business-to-business dealings. The usual terms of trade for such sales is that payment by the buyer is due no later than the 20th of the month following the month of sale. That timetable is well within the 93-day limit. A short-term agreement for sale and purchase will not be an excepted financial arrangement if the person elects to treat all such agreements as financial arrangements under s EW 8. See further at ¶6-045. Short-term option An excepted financial arrangement includes a short-term option. A short-term option is an option to acquire or dispose of property or services if one of the following alternatives applies: ▪ settlement must take place or the services must be performed within 93 days of the date of the option agreement, or ▪ if the date of the option agreement is unknown, settlement must take place or the services must be performed within 93 days of  the earlier of: □ the date of first payment by the buyer, and □ the date on which the first right in the property is transferred or the services are performed. A party to a short-term option may elect to treat the agreement as a financial arrangement under s EW 8. See further at ¶6-045. Travellers’ cheques Travellers’ cheques are an excepted financial arrangement. A person may elect to treat the travellers’ cheques as a financial arrangement under s EW 8. See further at ¶6-045. Variable principal debt instrument An excepted financial arrangement includes a variable principal debt instrument if all instruments of that kind held by the person at all times during the income year do not exceed $50,000. A variable principal debt instrument is one that contemplates further advances on demand or on call. It is also an instrument that contemplates that foreign currency advances must be repaid on demand. A bank overdraft is perhaps the most common example of a variable principal debt instrument. A person may elect that a variable principal debt instrument be classified as a financial arrangement under s EW 8. See further at ¶6-045. Law: IT07 ss EW 5, EW 52, EW 52B  ¶6-075 Relationship between a financial arrangement and an excepted financial arrangement It is particularly common for a transaction, upon closer examination, to involve a number of associated transactions. A purchase of consumer goods by electronic funds transfer or by credit card, for example, may result in an agreement between the merchant and the consumer and the finance institutions of the merchant and the  consumer. A proliferation of transactions from a purchase of goods or services may result in some that are financial arrangements and others that are excepted financial arrangements. Some guidance on their separation may be desirable to ensure that different statutory regimes operate according to their tenor. A first proposition is that an excepted financial arrangement can be part of a financial arrangement. The kind of excepted financial arrangement determines the amounts taken into account under the financial arrangements rules. Solely attributable amounts excluded For certain categories of excepted financial arrangements that are a part of a financial arrangement, any amount solely attributable to the excepted financial arrangement is not taken into account under the financial arrangements rules. The following excepted financial arrangements fall within this exclusion: ▪ an annuity ▪ a bet ▪ an emissions unit ▪ a greenhouse gas unit (prior to 30 November 2020, a non-Kyoto greenhouse gas unit) ▪ a research and development agreement ▪ an employment contract ▪ a farm-out arrangement ▪ a group investment fund interest ▪ a hire purchase agreement for livestock or bloodstock ▪ an insurance contract ▪ a lease that is not a finance lease  ▪ a New Zealand currency loan that is interest-free, repayable on demand for the lender ▪ an interest in a partnership or joint venture ▪ a look-through interest for a look-through company ▪ an assignment and return of emissions units as part of a loan ▪ a share-lending arrangement ▪ a share or an option over shares ▪ a specified preference share ▪ membership of a superannuation scheme, and ▪ a warranty. Solely attributable amounts included For other categories of excepted financial arrangement that are a part of a financial arrangement, any amount solely attributable to the excepted financial arrangement is an amount taken into account under the financial arrangements rules. The categories of excepted financial arrangement that become subject to this treatment are: ▪ certain arrangements to which a transitional resident is a party ▪ a private or domestic purpose loan in a foreign currency for a borrower who is a cash basis person ▪ an option over property for a private or domestic purpose ▪ a private or domestic agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services or specified option ▪ an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services where sales and purchases prepaid  ▪ a short-term agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services ▪ a short-term option ▪ travellers’ cheques, and ▪ a variable principal debt instrument. Reason for different treatments The Commissioner explained the reason for the different treatment according to the kind of excepted financial arrangements, stating that the solely attributable rule was amended so that it does not apply to arrangements that are excepted financial arrangements for compliance cost reasons only. In other words, these excepted financial arrangements are outside financial arrangements rules on their own but, when used within a wider financial arrangement, they are subject to the financial arrangements rules. The Commissioner also stated that income or expenditure is solely attributable to an excepted financial arrangement if it could have been expected to arise, or be incurred, without the support of a wider financial arrangement. The solely attributable phrase should not be interpreted strictly. A gain or loss remains solely attributable to an excepted financial arrangement, even if a non-excepted financial arrangement, such as a loan, is a necessary precondition for the gain or loss to be derived or incurred. As an example, the Commissioner referred to the situation of a loan raised to purchase shares. The share subscription and all benefits flowing from it, such as dividends, are solely attributable to the shares as an excepted financial arrangement and so are not taken into account under the financial arrangements rules. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 6, July 1999 at 10. It may not always be easy to understand how an excepted financial arrangement is “part of” a financial arrangement. The Commissioner appears to accept the example of where monies are lent to subscribe for shares. It appears to be accepted that the entire  transaction is one financial arrangement with the test of amounts solely attributable to an excepted financial arrangement applied to exclude any dividends from being accounted for under the financial arrangements rules. There is some scope to debate the cogency of this example. There is a basis for doubting whether the transaction of loan and share acquisition form one financial arrangement despite their close association. The two contracts may be freestanding without financial interdependence. It is probable that in some situations it may be necessary to draw a distinction between an excepted financial arrangement that is “part of” a financial arrangement and one that is “subject to” a financial arrangement. An example could be the sale of shares under an agreement for sale and purchase that is not itself to be classified as an excepted financial arrangement. It may be appropriate to regard the shares as subject to the agreement for sale and purchase as a financial arrangement but not as part of that financial arrangement. That view would be on the basis that the contract of shareholding continues between the issuing company and its shareholder irrespective of any arrangements the shareholder may make for disposal of that contract as a form of property. The Commissioner may make a binding ruling on whether an amount is solely attributable to an excepted financial arrangement. Excepted financial arrangements that form part of a financial arrangement are discussed by P Speakman in “The FA rules: problems and practical issues”, CCH, New Zealand Tax Planning Report, No 1, May 2007, p 1. Law: IT07 s EW 6  SPREADING METHODS ¶6-102 Spreading method required for financial arrangements  A party to a financial arrangement must use a spreading method to calculate income and expenditure under the financial arrangement for each income year over the term of the financial arrangement. This is unless the person is not required to apply a spreading method. A spreading method is not required to be applied: ▪ by a cash basis person, unless an election to the contrary is made ▪ by a trustee of a trust fund for personal injury compensation, if the trustee meets the criteria for classification as a cash basis person ▪ in the income year in which a base price adjustment calculation is required upon disposal or maturity of the financial arrangement. Law: IT07 ss EW 12, EW 13  ¶6-120 Cash basis person A cash basis person is not required to apply a spreading method to a financial arrangement, unless an election to do so is made. The absence of the spreading requirement applies to the cash basis person as both a lender and a borrower. A cash basis person is still required to undertake a base price adjustment when the financial arrangement matures or is disposed of. Example: Mr TP invests in a zero-coupon loan with a face value of $150,000, maturing in two years, for an outlay of $120,000. Under the financial arrangements rules, the $30,000 return on the investment should be spread over the two-year term of the loan. However, if Mr TP is a cash basis person, he will only return the income when it is received upon repayment of the loan. The return is recognised upon calculation of the base price adjustment when the loan is repaid.  A cash basis adjustment may be required when a person becomes a cash basis person or ceases to be one. Required thresholds A cash basis person is a person whose financial arrangements do not exceed prescribed values set out in s EW 57(1)–(3). Any taxpayer can be a cash basis person, not just natural persons. There are two aspects to the criteria for classification as a cash basis person. Firstly, the person must satisfy one of the following prescribed values thresholds: ▪ income and expenditure under all financial arrangements for the income year does not exceed $100,000, or ▪ the value of all financial arrangements on every day of the income year does not exceed $1m, with that value being determined on the basis of: □ face value for a fixed principal financial arrangement □ the amount owing for a variable principal debt instrument, and □ the value determined under the old financial arrangements rules if they apply to the financial arrangement. These thresholds apply to all financial arrangements to which the person is a party during the income year. The financial arrangements will include any financial arrangements that are subject to the old financial arrangements rules. Secondly, in addition to satisfying one of the above prescribed values thresholds, there is a deferral threshold requirement that the difference between the accrual and cash treatments cannot exceed $40,000 for the income year. The deferral threshold requirement is determined by applying a formula to each of the person’s financial arrangements. The total of the outcomes of the formula cannot exceed $40,000. The formula is applied as follows:  (accrual income − cash basis income) + (cash basis expenditure − accrual expenditure) where: accrual income is the amount that would have been income if the person had chosen to apply the yield to maturity method, the straight-line method or an approved method cash basis income is the amount that would have been income determined on a cash basis cash basis expenditure is the amount that would have been expenditure incurred on a cash basis, and accrual expenditure is the amount that would have been expenditure incurred if the person had chosen to apply the yield to maturity method, the straight-line method or an approved method. The following supporting principles are applied when determining if both the prescribed values thresholds and deferral threshold are met: ▪ where the trustee of a bare trust is party to a financial arrangement, the value of the arrangement and any income or expenditure arising is attributed to the beneficiary of the trust to the extent of the beneficiary’s share in the beneficial interest of the arrangement ▪ where a person is a beneficiary of a trust, other than a bare trust, whose trustee is a party to a financial arrangement, the value of the arrangement and any income that is trustee or beneficiary income under the trust rules is excluded from the calculations, and ▪ where a person is party to a financial arrangement as a trustee, the following are excluded from the calculations:  □ the value of the arrangement, if it produces trustee or beneficiary income under the trust rules □ income that is trustee or beneficiary income under the trust rules □ the value of the arrangement, if expenditure is incurred under it, and □ expenditure incurred under the arrangement. A testamentary trustee will be a cash basis person if the deceased was a cash basis person and the thresholds discussed above were met at the time of death. However, treatment of the trustee as a cash basis person cannot extend beyond the period encompassing the year of death and the following four income years (s EW 60). The Commissioner may treat a person who would otherwise be a cash basis person for a class of financial arrangements as not being a cash basis person if the class has been structured and promoted to defer an income tax liability, or the parties to a financial arrangement are associated and the person’s calculation of income and expenditure is different to the associated party. Election to apply a spreading method A cash basis person may elect to apply a spreading method to all financial arrangements to which the person is a party (s EW 61). To make the election, the person calculates a cash basis adjustment. No election may be made for a financial arrangement that is subject to a base price adjustment calculation. The change of status applies to all current financial arrangements of the person, followed by all subsequent financial arrangements. However, the election may be revoked by notice with a year’s return of income. In that event, the revocation applies to all financial arrangements the person enters into after the income year in which the notice is given. Cash basis adjustment  A cash basis adjustment must be calculated by a person if, in an income year: ▪ they cease to be a cash basis person, or ▪ they choose to use a spreading method. The cash basis adjustment is calculated in relation to all financial arrangements to which the person was a party at the end of both the current and prior income year. However, no adjustment is calculated for a financial arrangement that is already subject to a spreading method. A cash basis adjustment is also calculated for a person who becomes a cash basis person in an income year. Again, this is done for all financial arrangements to which the person was a party at the end of both the current and prior income year. However, no cash basis adjustment is calculated for a person who becomes a cash basis person: ▪ if the person chooses to continue to apply a spreading method ▪ for a financial arrangement that is already being accounted for on a cash basis. A person will not be a cash basis person if they do not calculate a required cash basis adjustment. The cash basis adjustment is calculated using the following formula: adjusted income − adjusted expenditure − previous income + previous expenditure where: adjusted income is: ▪ for a person who becomes a cash basis person, the amount that would have been income derived by the person from the financial arrangement if the person had been a cash basis person from the date they became a party to the  financial arrangement until the last day of the income year for which the calculation is made ▪ for a person who ceases to be a cash basis person, the amount that would have been income from the financial arrangement if the person had used a spreading method from the date they became a party to the financial arrangement until the last day of the income year for which the calculation is made adjusted expenditure is: ▪ for a person who becomes a cash basis person, the amount that would have been expenditure incurred under the financial arrangement if the person had been a cash basis person from the date on they became a party to the financial arrangement until the last day of the income year for which the calculation is made ▪ for a person who ceases to be a cash basis person, the amount that would have been expenditure incurred under the financial arrangement if the person had applied a spreading method from the date on they became a party to the financial arrangement until the last day of the income year for which the calculation is made previous income is income derived under the financial arrangement in previous income years, and previous expenditure is expenditure incurred under the financial arrangement in previous income years. Application of the cash basis adjustment produces the only income or expenditure under the relevant financial arrangement for the income year. A cash basis adjustment that is: ▪ positive is income of the person, and ▪ negative is expenditure incurred by the person.  Law: IT07 ss EW 54–EW 63  ¶6-125 Spreading methods for financial arrangements generally A spreading method is the method of calculating and allocating income and expenditure under a financial arrangement over the term of the financial arrangement. Application of a spreading method implements the first purpose of the financial arrangements rules to achieve a fair and reasonable allocation so as to prevent the deferral of income or the advancement of expenditure. The result of a spreading method for an income year is: ▪ income derived by the person in the income year, or ▪ expenditure incurred by the person in the income year. Once adopted, a spreading method must be applied on a consistent basis. The method must be used for all financial arrangements that are of the same or similar nature. It is possible to change a spreading method. Upon doing so, a spreading method adjustment is required. See ¶6-205. There is a hierarchy to the spreading methods in the sense that a method must be applied if the circumstances applicable to the method are satisfied and, if not, the possible application of the next method must be considered. Generally, taxpayers that adopt the New Zealand equivalent to International Financial Reporting Standards (NZ IFRS) timing rules for accounting purposes have been required to apply those rules for tax purposes from the 2007–08 income year, unless they qualified for and chose to apply another spreading method based on an approved existing determination or one of two specific alternative methods (see ¶6-130). Taxpayers who do not prepare IFRS accounts apply the other spreading methods set out in the financial arrangements rules  except that since the 2007–08 income year they have not had the option of using the financial reporting method (see ¶6-184). The following flowchart summarises the spreading methods available to different taxpayers, and the order in which they can be adopted. Financial arrangement spreading rules  [Source: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 126.] Choice between methods Limited guidance is given on which spreading method is to be applied to a financial arrangement under the financial arrangements rules. Where the person is not required to apply the IFRS method and is eligible to apply any of the following methods, the person can choose which one to adopt. The methods are: ▪ the yield to maturity method or an alternative to that method (see ¶6-135) ▪ the straight-line method (see ¶6-145) ▪ a market value method (see ¶6-153) ▪ a determination method (see ¶6-165) ▪ an alternative to a determination method (see ¶6-175) ▪ a financial reporting method (see ¶6-184), or ▪ a default method (see ¶6-190). Note that the Commissioner may make a binding ruling under s 91CC(1)(b) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 on the use of a spreading method for the purposes of ss EW 15E (Determination alternatives) and EW 15I (Mandatory use of yield to maturity method for some arrangements). Consideration subject to a spreading method Some guidance is also given on what is the subject of a spreading method. The spreading method must take into account: ▪ all consideration paid or to be paid to the person in relation to the financial arrangement, but excluding non-contingent fees or, for the purposes of the IFRS method or the modified fair value method, non-integral fees. See s EW 15(1)(a)  ▪ all consideration paid or to be paid by the person in relation to the financial arrangement, but excluding non-contingent fees or, for the purposes of the IFRS method or the modified fair value method, non-integral fees. See s EW 15(1)(b) ▪ all amounts remitted or to be remitted by the person under the financial arrangement, and ▪ all amounts that would have been payable to the person under the financial arrangement if they had not been remitted by law. A non-contingent fee is a fee that is for services provided for a person becoming a party to a financial arrangement and that is payable regardless of whether the financial arrangement proceeds. A common example of a non-contingent fee would be an establishment fee imposed by a financier upon reaching agreement with a client to enter into a formal loan agreement. For those taxpayers applying the IFRS method in s EW 15D, the distinction between “contingent” and “non-contingent” fees is replaced by the distinction between “integral” and “non-integral” in order to align the tax treatment explicitly with the financial reporting treatment under NZIAS 39. A non-integral fee is a fee or transaction cost that, for the purposes of financial reporting, is not an integral part of the effective interest rate of a financial arrangement. Law: IT07 ss EW 14, EW 15, EW 19, EW 24, YA 1  ¶6-130 IFRS method under FA rules Subject to some specific exceptions (see below), a person must use the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) method of spreading income (or one of its specific alternatives) if the person uses IFRS to prepare financial statements and to report for financial arrangements. The IFRS method requires a person to allocate an amount to an income year in accordance with the IFRS rules, subject to certain modifications. Those modifications, specified in s EW 15D(2), are:  ▪ Credit impairment adjustments must be reversed out for tax purposes and not allocated to an income year (unless the fair value method is used, the financial arrangements are not derivative instruments and the person’s business includes dealing in those financial arrangements). Instead, credit impairment adjustments will only be deductible for tax purposes when the debt is written off as “bad” in accordance with s DB 31 (see ¶10-152). ▪ Borrowing costs are not capitalised under NZIAS 23. ▪ From 1 April 2014, for the 2014–15 and later income years, for loans with below market interest rates, no account is taken of bookkeeping adjustments required under IFRS accounting rules, such as one-off adjustments to the value of the loan and notional payments or receipts of interest. These adjustments have no economic substance and do not reflect actual payments between parties, and s EW 15D(2)(ac) and (ad) ensure that these bookkeeping adjustments do not have a tax effect. Note that a transitional provision, s EZ 69, required taxpayers who had been claiming deductions for these bookkeeping adjustments or paying tax on them to perform a change of spreading method adjustment in their 2014–15 income year that effectively reversed the earlier deductions or payments. ▪ If the financial arrangement is an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services in foreign currency (foreign currency ASAP), or an IFRS designated FX hedge for a foreign currency ASAP, ss EW 32 and EW 33B apply to value the relevant property or service for the IFRS rules. Section EW 33B also provides rules for subsequently adjusting the treatment of the relevant hedge. Transitional provisions deal with foreign currency ASAPs entered into before the 2014–15 income year. See ¶6-400. ▪ From 1 April 2015, for the 2015–16 and later income years, an amount allocated to equity, equity reserves or comprehensive income under the fair value method must be allocated to an  income year for tax purposes. In previous years the provision referred only to equity reserves. In limited circumstances, this could allow an amount associated with a financial arrangement to be taken directly to equity as a contribution to capital and therefore not spread. Note that a transitional provision, s EZ 69B, requires such taxpayers to treat the change from nonallocation to allocation as a change in spreading method and to perform an adjustment in their 2015–16 income year. Exceptions to the IFRS method In some cases, an IFRS person is required not to apply the IFRS method and instead must apply a different specified method of spreading income. In other circumstances, an IFRS person may choose to apply a different specified method to the IFRS method. Compulsory alternative methods An IFRS person must use one of the following methods for spreading the income in respect of a financial arrangement, if the terms of the method allow: ▪ Determination G5C: “Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes”. ▪ Determination G22: “Optional Conversion Convertible Notes Denominated in New Zealand Dollars Convertible at the Option of the Holder”. See further at ¶6-218. ▪ Determination G22A: “Optional Convertible Notes Denominated in New Zealand Dollars”. See further at ¶6-218. ▪ An alternative method to one of the determinations set out above (or its successor) so long as it does not produce a materially different result and has regards to the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. See s EW 15H. If one of the compulsory determination methods set out above does not apply and the financial arrangement:  ▪ includes an excepted financial arrangement ▪ is treated to some extent as an equity instrument under IFRS ▪ is classified as an operating lease under NZIAS 17 and in the person’s financial statements, or ▪ is an agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services that is not a foreign ASAP (other than life financial reinsurance) the IFRS person must apply one of the following compulsory methods to spread the income and expenditure in respect of the financial arrangement: ▪ the yield to maturity method (see ¶6-135) ▪ Determination G26: “Variable Rate Financial Arrangement” ▪ a determination made under s 90AC(1)(bb) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 or a binding ruling made under s 91CC(1)(b) of that Act, or ▪ an alternative method to one of the methods set out above so long as it does not produce a materially different result and has regard to the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. See s EW 15I. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes changes that will allow taxpayers who apply the New Zealand Equivalent to International Financial Reporting Standard 16 Leases (NZ IFRS 16) to more closely follow their accounting treatment of leases for tax purposes (see ¶10-675). The proposed changes will apply only to lessees and are intended to apply for income years starting on or after 1 January 2019. As noted above, s EW 15I allows a person who has a tax finance lease that is classified as an operating lease under NZIAS 17 to apply the yield to  maturity method. NZ IFRS 16 removes the accounting distinction between operating and finance leases for lessees. However, the proposed changes ensure that the yield to maturity method will continue to be available for these leases. Optional alternative methods If an IFRS person is not required to use one of the compulsory alternative methods to the IFRS method, that person may qualify for one of the following optional alternative methods: ▪ a determination alternative (or an alternative that is not materially different from a determination method). The determination methods available to an IFRS person are: □ Determination G3: “Yield to Maturity Method” (but only for New Zealand currency non-derivative financial arrangements from the 2009–10 income year, and Determination G25: “Variation in the terms of a financial arrangement” must be used when applying it) □ Determination G9C: “Financial Arrangements that are Denominated in a Currency other than New Zealand Dollars: An Expected Value Approach” □ Determination G14B: “Forward Contracts for Foreign Exchange and Commodities: An Expected Value Approach” □ Determination G27: “Swaps” □ a determination by the Commissioner under s 90AC(1)(bb) of the Tax Administration Act or a binding ruling made under s 91CC(1)(b) of that Act, and □ an alternative method to one of the determinations set out above (or its successor) so long as it does not produce a materially different result and has regard to the purposes of the financial arrangements rules ▪ the expected value method (s EW 15F), or  ▪ the modified fair value method (s EW 15G). When the determination alternative is either Determination G9C or Determination G14B, the determination is modified under s EW 15E(3), and when it is Determination G27, it is modified under s EW 15E(3B). To qualify for the expected value method or the modified fair value method, the IFRS person’s financial arrangement must be denominated in a foreign currency or be a derivative instrument. It must not be a hedge or a foreign currency ASAP, and the IFRS person cannot be a dealer. Consistency of use of IFRS method A person who starts to apply the IFRS method or an IFRS determination method must continue to apply that method over the arrangement’s remaining term until the base price adjustment is performed, unless they have a sound commercial reason for changing the method. A “sound commercial reason” includes starting or ceasing to prepare IFRS accounts. The consistency requirements are modified by s EZ 52B in relation to the use of Determination G3 in the 2009–10 income year, or from the 2008–09 income year for financial arrangements subject to a creditor workout. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 127. Law: IT07 ss EW 14, EW 15B–EW 15I, EW 25B, EW 26, EZ 52B, EZ 69, EZ 69B, EZ 75, EZ 76  ¶6-135 Yield to maturity or an alternative method under FA rules To recognise the income or expenditure of a financial arrangement under the financial arrangements rules (provided the person is not required to use the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) method or any of its alternatives (see ¶6-130)), the person may apply:  ▪ the yield to maturity method, or ▪ an alternative method to the yield to maturity method. There are several criteria that an alternative method must satisfy before it can be adopted. The alternative method must be one that: ▪ has regard to the principles of accrual accounting ▪ conforms with commercially acceptable practice ▪ results in the allocation to each income year of amounts that are not materially different from those that would have been allocated under the yield to maturity method, and ▪ is also used by the person for financial reporting purposes for the same or similar financial arrangements or, where not so used, the method: □ is used for the same or similar financial arrangements □ reflects the dominant purpose for entering into the financial arrangement □ is not used for tax avoidance, and □ is approved by the Commissioner, whether specifically or by a determination. The yield to maturity method is described in Determination G3: “Yield to Maturity Method”. The determination continues to have application until a new determination is made, even though it was issued under the Income Tax Act 1976. The determination states the following principles: ▪ the yield to maturity method applies to all financial arrangements where the amounts and dates are known not later than the first balance date of the issuer or holder (parties to the financial arrangement) after issue or acquisition, as the case may be, and determined in New Zealand currency  ▪ the approach adopted is to define a constant annual rate R representing the yield to maturity of all the cash flows in the financial arrangement with income derived and expenditure incurred being assumed to compound on the date of each payment ▪ there is no explicit formula for a yield to maturity in terms of the cashflows, but the yield to maturity is defined as the discount rate at which the cashflows accumulate to zero, and ▪ as part of the method, the amount of income derived or expenditure incurred to be compounded at the end of each period is calculated as a fraction F multiplied by the principal outstanding during the period. This income derived and expenditure incurred is then added to the principal outstanding for the next period (if one exists) and the final payment to equal the principal outstanding during the final period plus the income derived or expenditure incurred during that period. Example: TP Ltd provides PP Ltd with $100,000, to be repaid after three years. PP Ltd agrees to repay TP $133,100 at the beginning of year four. The interest rate is 10% (constant). Since no interest is paid progressively, the interest charge is effectively compounded so as to give a total interest charge of $33,100. The interest charge must be spread over three years in a manner which makes the interest rate invariable but the dollar interest charge changeable because of the increasing amounts of money lent to PP Ltd. Beginning of year  Amount lent  Annual interest  $  $  one  100,000  10,000  two  110,000  11,000  three  121,000  12,100  four  133,100  –  Total interest  33,100  The Commissioner has made some comments on the concept of materiality. The comments indicated that it is necessary to identify the difference between the income or expenditure from the financial arrangement calculated using either the yield to maturity or another method as prescribed by determination by the Commissioner in contrast with the accounting method adopted by the person. That difference will be regarded as materially different if it is equal to or greater than either 5% of the amount calculated according to the determination or $500,000. That difference will not be regarded as being materially different if it is less than both 5% of the amount calculated according to the determination and $500,000. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 1, July 1991 at 4. Law: IT07 ss EW 16, EW 23  ¶6-145 Straight-line method under FA rules A party to a financial arrangement may use the straight-line method to recognise income and expenditure if: ▪ at no time during the income year does the total value of the person’s financial arrangements exceed $1.85m ▪ the straight-line method is used for all the person’s financial arrangements for which they can use it that are held at the end of the income year, and ▪ the person is not required to use the IFRS method (or any of its alternatives) (see ¶6-130). When calculating total value: ▪ the value of a fixed principal arrangement is its face value ▪ the value of a variable principal debt instrument is its value on the day of valuation ▪ the value of a financial arrangement subject to the old financial arrangements rules is the value as determined under those  rules, and ▪ all the person’s financial arrangements must be taken into account regardless of which financial arrangement taxation regime applies when determining their value. If the straight-line method is adopted for a financial arrangement, the person must continue to use that method for the arrangement’s remaining term until they are required to perform a base price adjustments. This is the case even if the total value of financial arrangements held by the person subsequently exceeds the $1.85m threshold. A change from the straight-line method to another spreading method is permitted only if there is written authorisation from the Commissioner to do so (see ¶6-205). The straight-line method is explained in Determination G24: “Straight Line Method”. The determination states the following principles: ▪ the total finance charges may be apportioned over the term of the financial arrangement pro rata with the principal expected to be outstanding in each period between payments and the length of that period ▪ for a variable rate financial arrangement interest payable in respect of a period is added to the total finance charges (excluding interest) which have been apportioned to that period ▪ in all other cases, interest is included in the calculation of total finance charges, and ▪ total finance charges include interest, any premium or discount and fees (excluding those deductible at the commencement of the loan) with interest payable under a variable rate financial arrangement excluded from the total finance charges to be apportioned because it is not known in advance. Law: IT07 ss EW 17, EW 25  ¶6-153 Market valuation method under FA rules Income and expenditure under a financial arrangement may be recognised under a market valuation method, if all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ one of the following applies: □ the person’s business includes dealing in financial arrangements of the same class, or □ the financial arrangement is an exchange-traded option, a forward contract for foreign exchange or a futures contract ▪ the parties to the financial arrangement are not associated persons ▪ one of the following applies: □ the Commissioner has, by a determination, approved the market, the method and the source of information used to determine market values, or □ the person can demonstrate market prices that are reliable ▪ the method conforms with commercially acceptable practice ▪ the method will be used over the remaining term of the financial arrangement ▪ the method is also used for financial reporting purposes for the same or similar financial arrangements or, if not so used, the method: □ is used for the same or similar financial arrangements □ reflects the dominant purpose for entering into the financial arrangement □ is not used for tax avoidance, and  □ is approved by the Commissioner, whether specifically or by a determination, and ▪ the person is not required to use the IFRS method (or any of its alternatives) (see ¶6-130). Once adopted, the market valuation method must continue to be used for the remainder of the term of the financial arrangement. This is unless the Commissioner gives written authorisation permitting a change of method (see ¶6-205). The Commissioner has explained that the availability of the market valuation method is restricted because of the need to limit bad debt deductions. Under the market valuation method, any decrease in market prices (including a decrease attributable to a decrease in creditworthiness) is recognised as expenditure. However, a decrease in creditworthiness is generally not recognised as expenditure under the bad debt deduction rules, except in the case of dealers. The Commissioner added that a party to forward contracts for foreign exchange, futures and exchange-traded options may also apply the market valuation method to those financial arrangements. These financial arrangements do not have any principal values, so the question of a bad debt deduction is not a consideration. The Commissioner made further comments on the requirement that the party to the financial arrangement must be able to show that the market value used is reliable. The Commissioner said that the objective criteria that should be considered for determining whether markets are reliable include the following: ▪ the number of participants in the market or having access to the market ▪ the frequency of trading in the market ▪ the existence of an appropriate regulatory body ▪ the existence of industry standards regulating trading practices, and  ▪ the accessibility of sources of information to market participants. The Commissioner concluded by emphasising that the overriding requirement is that the market value criteria must be reliable. For the Commissioner’s comments, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 11, No 6, July 1999 at 16. The person must keep sufficient records in the English language to enable the Commissioner to verify the reliability of the market values. Determinations made by the Commissioner incorporating a market valuation method include Determination G7C: “Futures and Options Markets” (an amalgamation of former Determinations G7B and G18) and Determination G19: “Exchange Traded Option Contracts”. The market valuation method is the most likely method to be adopted by dealers in the forward and futures market and in other financial arrangements such as government stock. These dealers can use the commonly accepted method of “mark to market”. This means that the gain or loss from holding a financial arrangement is measured as the difference between its market value at the beginning of the period and its market value at the end of the period. Example: TP Bank is a dealer in government stock, and it satisfies the criteria allowing the use of a market value method. On 1 April TP Bank purchases government stock with a face value of $1m and a coupon rate of 8% payable six monthly in arrears. The amount paid for the stock is $1.1m. This amount does not include accrued interest. At the following 31 March the market price of the stock is $1.2m, with TP Bank already receiving $80,000 in interest payments. Under the market value approach, the amount of income that TP Bank has derived is $180,000, being the interest at market value.  Law: IT07 ss EW 18, EW 23, EW 25(4)  ¶6-165 Determination method under FA rules A party to a financial arrangement may use a determination method (a method set out in one of the Commissioner’s determinations) to recognise income and expenditure if:  ▪ the person cannot use the yield to maturity method or an alternative and cannot, or chooses not to, use the straight-line method or a market valuation method, and ▪ the person is not required to use the IFRS method (or any of its alternatives) (see ¶6-130). Once adopted, the determination method must continue to be applied to the financial arrangement and similar financial arrangements. A change of spreading method may be possible if there is a sound commercial reason for the change and, if so, a spreading method adjustment is required (see ¶6-205). The determination may be one that the Commissioner issued in general terms. Alternatively, the person may have made a specific application for issue of a determination incorporating a suggested method. Determinations issued include: ▪ Determination G5C: “Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes” ▪ Determination G12: “Accounting for Financial Arrangements in the Absence of a Determination”, and ▪ Determination G22A: “Optional Convertible Notes Denominated in New Zealand Dollars”. Note that taxpayers who prepare accounts that comply with NZ IFRS have the option of using only certain specified determination methods (or an alternative that is not materially different from those methods). See ¶6-130. Law: IT07 s EW 20(1)  ¶6-175 Alternative to a determination under FA rules Income or expenditure under a financial arrangement may be recognised under an alternative method to a determination method, but only if:  ▪ the person cannot use the yield to maturity method or an alternative method to it (see ¶6-135) ▪ the person: □ may not use the straight-line method (see ¶6-145) or a market valuation method (see ¶6-153), or □ may use the straight-line method or a market valuation method, but chooses not to do so ▪ the person is not required to use the IFRS method (or any of its alternatives) (see ¶6-130) ▪ the alternative has regard to the principles of accrual accounting ▪ the alternative conforms with commercially acceptable practice ▪ the alternative results in the allocation to each income year of amounts that are not materially different from those that would have been allocated using the determination method, and ▪ the alternative is also used for financial reporting purposes for the same or similar financial arrangements or, if not so used, the method: □ is used for the same or similar financial arrangements □ reflects the dominant purpose for entering into the financial arrangement □ is not used for tax avoidance, and □ is approved by the Commissioner, whether specifically or by a determination. Once adopted, the method must be used for the financial arrangement and similar financial arrangements. A change of spreading method may be possible if there is a sound commercial  reason for it and, if so, a spreading method adjustment is required (see ¶6-205). Law: IT07 ss EW 20(2), EW 23  ¶6-184 Financial reporting method under FA rules A financial reporting method may be used to recognise income or expenditure under a financial arrangement if: ▪ the person cannot use the yield to maturity method or an alternative to that method (see ¶6-135) ▪ the person: □ may not use the straight-line method (see ¶6-145) or a market valuation method (see ¶6-153), or □ may use the straight-line method or a market valuation method, but chooses not to do so ▪ the person is not required to use the IFRS method (or any of its alternatives) (see ¶6-130) ▪ the Commissioner has not made a determination for the financial arrangement ▪ the method conforms with commercially acceptable practice ▪ the method is also used for financial reporting purposes for the same or similar financial arrangements or, if not so used, the method: □ is used for the same or similar financial arrangements □ reflects the dominant purpose for entering into the financial arrangement □ is not used for tax avoidance, and  □ is approved by the Commissioner, whether specifically or by a determination, and ▪ the method allocates a reasonable amount to each income year over the term of the financial arrangement. Law: IT07 ss EW 21, EW 23  ¶6-190 Default method under FA rules A default method may be used to recognise income or expenditure under a financial arrangement if: ▪ the person cannot use the yield to maturity method or an alternative to that method (see ¶6-135) ▪ the person: □ may not use the straight-line method (see ¶6-145) or a market valuation method (see ¶6-153), or □ may use the straight-line method or a market valuation method, but chooses not to do so ▪ the person may not use a determination method (see ¶6-165), an alternative to a determination method (see ¶6-175) or a financial reporting method (see ¶6-184) ▪ the method conforms with commercially acceptable practice, and ▪ the method allocates a reasonable amount to each income year over the term of the financial arrangement. The default method must continue to be used for the financial arrangement and similar financial arrangements. A change of spreading method may be possible if a sound commercial reason exists and, if so, a spreading method adjustment is required (see ¶6205). Law: IT07 s EW 22  ¶6-205 Change of spreading method under FA rules A change in the spreading method applied to a financial arrangement is possible and, if a change occurs, a spreading method adjustment must be calculated. A change from the straight-line method or a market value method requires the Commissioner’s authorisation, as long as the person does not change to an IFRS method under s EW 15B (see ¶6-130). It may be anticipated that the Commissioner will not readily approve a change of either method. The provisions on spreading methods emphasise a continuation of these two methods even if, for example, the monetary limit for the straight-line method is exceeded. There may not be many circumstances that overcome the themes of continuity and consistency that are applicable to the straight-line method and a market valuation method. A change may be made from the IFRS method, yield to maturity method, a determination method, an alternative method, a financial reporting method or a default method to another spreading method. This is provided there is a sound commercial reason for the change in method. No guidance is given on what constitutes a sound commercial reason beyond confirmation that it does not include the pursuit of taxation benefits but does include starting or ceasing to prepare IFRS accounts and starting to use the IFRS method (or one of its alternatives) for the first time. One possibility is a significant change of circumstances since the financial arrangement commenced. A person using a market valuation method, for example, may experience a significant change in market circumstances that make it inappropriate to continue with the method. Where a change in method is thought to be justified, all information concerning the reason for the change must be retained. Spreading method adjustment A person who changes from the IFRS method, yield to maturity method, a determination method, an alternative method, a financial reporting method or a default method to another method must  calculate a spreading method adjustment. The amount produced by the calculation becomes the person’s income or expenditure under the financial arrangement for the income year in which the change is made. The outcomes are that: ▪ a positive amount under the calculation is income, and ▪ a negative amount under the calculation is expenditure incurred. The spreading method adjustment is calculated using the following formula: income (new method) − expenditure (new method) − income (old method) + expenditure (old method) where: income (new method) is the total income that the person would have derived from the financial arrangement had the new method been applied from the date on which the person became a party to the financial arrangement until the last day of the income year for which the calculation is made expenditure (new method) is the total amount that would have been expenditure incurred by the person under the financial arrangement had the new method been applied from the date on which the person became a party to the financial arrangement until the last day of the income year for which the adjustment is made income (old method) is the total income the person derived from the financial arrangement in previous income years, and expenditure (old method) is the total expenditure the person has incurred under the financial arrangement in previous income years. The spreading method adjustment does not apply to a change: ▪ from the fair value method (under the IFRS method) where the financial arrangement is not subject to a creditor workout, or  ▪ from the market value method to an IFRS method. Instead a base price adjustment must be performed. See s EW 29(13), ¶6-358 and ¶6-370. Note that in relation to optional convertible notes, when changing from using Determination G22 to Determination G22A, no spreading method adjustment is required. See s EZ 52C and ¶6-218. Law: IT07 ss EW 26, EW 27, EZ 52C  ¶6-213 Currency fluctuations under FA rules An expected value approach may be adopted for the recognition of currency fluctuations if payment dates are known before the first balance date and forward rates for the foreign currency can be determined: Determination G9C: “Financial Arrangements that are Denominated in a Currency other than New Zealand Dollars: An Expected Value Approach”. If the expected value approach is not available, it may be necessary to recognise currency fluctuations on an annual, and unrealised, basis under Determination G9A: “Financial Arrangements that are Denominated in a Currency or Commodity other than New Zealand Dollars”. That second determination would need to be followed, unless another determination is required to be applied. Currency fluctuations under a contract to buy or sell foreign currency, or commodities in the future, are subject to Determination G14B: “Forward Contracts for Foreign Exchange and Commodities: An Expected Value Approach”. A foreign exchange forward contract is a contract for the sale of a currency. The difference between a forward contract and an ordinary conversion of one currency to another is that, in the case of a forward agreement, delivery is at a specified date in the future. Determination G9C and Determination G14B are discussed by the Commissioner in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 5, June 2004, at 72. Expected value approach — Determination G9C  Determination G9C may be applied if the rights and obligations under the financial arrangement are fixed or otherwise determined in a foreign currency. It must also be the case that payment dates under the financial arrangement are known not later than the first balance date after the person becomes a party to the financial arrangement and forward rates for the foreign currency can be determined. The determination cannot be applied to: ▪ a futures contract ▪ a security arrangement ▪ a financial arrangement denominated in a currency where the forward rates of the currency cannot be determined ▪ unless the determination specifically provides otherwise, any financial arrangement that is covered by one of the following: □ Determination G14: “Forward Contracts for Foreign Exchange and Commodities” □ Determination G19: “Exchange Traded Option Contracts” □ Determination G20: “Discounted Value of Amounts Payable in Relation to Trade Credits Denominated in a Foreign Currency” □ Determination G21: “Discounted Value of Amounts Payable in Relation to Deferred Property Settlements Denominated in a Foreign Currency” □ Determination G21A: “Agreements for Sale and Purchase of Property Denominated in Foreign Currency: Discounted Value of Amounts Payable” □ Determination G27: “Swaps” □ Determination G29: “Agreements for Sale and Purchase of Property Denominated in Foreign Currency: Exchange Rate  to Determine the Acquisition Price and Method for Spreading Income and Expenditure”. The explanation in Determination G9C outlines how the expected value approach is to be applied. The explanation states that it is necessary to: ▪ determine the expected component by taking into account all the base currency payments and payment dates in relation to the financial arrangement when the person becomes a party to the financial arrangement ▪ use the initial interest rate to calculate the base currency payments under a variable rate financial arrangement denominated in a base currency other than New Zealand dollars (NZD) and assume that this rate will apply throughout the term of the financial arrangement ▪ translate the base currency payments into expected NZD payments on the basis of the forward rates available at the time the person becomes a party to the financial arrangement ▪ spread the expected NZD net amount under the yield to maturity method and allocate it to each income year over the term of the financial arrangement on a daily basis, and ▪ measure the unexpected component at the end of each balance date as the difference between actual and expected NZD payments. Annual recognition of currency fluctuations — Determination G9A Determination G9A applies to a financial arrangement expressed in a foreign currency, where every right or obligation in relation to the financial arrangement is fixed in the foreign currency. The determination does not apply to: ▪ a forward or future contract  ▪ a futures contract ▪ a swap contract ▪ an option, or ▪ a security arrangement. The explanation in the determination states that the determination sets out a method for calculating the income or expenditure of a financial arrangement where any rights and obligations of the parties are expressed in a base currency other than NZD. The base currency might be a foreign currency or a commodity. Income and expenditure is calculated for each income year in accordance with the Income Tax Act and other determinations where appropriate, in the base currency. This income or expenditure, together with the opening tax book value and adjusted for amounts paid or received during the income year, is used to calculate the closing tax book value of the financial arrangement as at year end. For a conventional loan, the closing tax book value is equivalent to the outstanding principal and accrued interest under the loan as at year-end, in the base currency. The closing tax book value is converted into NZD at the spot rate applicable at that date. The income or expenditure in NZD is determined from: ▪ the amounts paid and/or received during the income year, converted to NZD on the dates of payment, and ▪ the net change in the amount of closing tax book values in NZD during the income year. This brings to account all accrued gains and losses on the financial arrangement, including gains and losses arising from currency translation. Foreign currency loans used to finance foreign residential rental property In July 2020, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 20/07, “Income tax – Application of the financial arrangements  rules to foreign currency loans used to finance foreign residential rental property”