 into his van while Dan is working, causing $3,000 worth of damage. The truck owner admits liability. Dan receives a cheque from the truck owner’s insurance company for $3,000. Dan has to pay output tax of $391.30 (3/23 of $3,000) and the insurance company can claim an input tax credit of $391.30.  Insurance is defined for GST purposes as “insurance or guarantee against loss, damage, injury or risk of any kind whatever”. “Life insurance” is expressly excluded from that definition. There are three exceptions to the above rules: ▪ The rule does not apply to payments for loss of earnings to persons both registered and unregistered. Under such contracts of insurance, the insurance company also has no corresponding automatic right to a deduction of nominal input tax. (See para (b) of the proviso to ss 5(13) and 20(3)(d)(v).) ▪ The rule will not apply to a payment received under a contract of insurance that is not liable for GST. ▪ The rule will also not apply to a payment received from a nonresident insurer. (See para (c) of the proviso to ss 5(13) and 20(3) (d)(vi).) ▪ The rule will also not apply to the supply of the contract of insurance where it is a supply of remote services that is zerorated under ss 11A(1)(x) (see para (d) of the proviso to s 5(13) and 20(3)(d)(vii)). See ¶32-067. Note that in February 2020, the Commissioner released a Commissioner’s statement, CS 20/01, “GST liability for insurance and settlement payments to third party claimants – Section 5(13) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 2, March 2020 at 7). The statement confirms the Commissioner’s long-standing position on the GST liability of a GST-registered thirdparty claimant when they receive a payment for damages or loss incurred, including by way of settlement agreement, under a contract of insurance. Some taxpayers considered that the wording in s 5(13) meant that, if an insurer made a payment to a GST-registered thirdparty claimant rather than to the GST-registered insured person, the insurer was entitled to an input tax credit under s 20(3)(d), but the third-party claimant did not incur a corresponding output tax liability. The Commissioner’s position is, and has been for many years, that  when an insurer of an insured person pays an amount to a GSTregistered third-party claimant in relation to a claim that the third-party claimant has against the insured person, and the other requirements of s 5(13) are met, then the third-party claimant must return GST on the receipt of that payment. Insurance payments to non-profit bodies — s 5(13AA) Non-profit bodies are able to claim input tax deductions for most goods and services even if they do not directly relate to the making of taxable supplies under s 20(3K). An asset sold by a non-profit body is subject to GST on sale or an equivalent event if GST input tax deductions have been claimed by the non-profit body in respect of the asset (see ¶32-048). Section 5(13AA) provides that if a non-profit body claims a deduction for goods and services used in an activity that is not a taxable activity, s 5(13) will apply to a payment under a contract of insurance as if the relevant asset were part of a taxable activity of the registered person. An exception applies if the person has made an election to treat the goods and services solely for use in a non-taxable activity under s 20(3KB). Section 5(13AA) therefore reflects the policy intent that insurance payments received by a non-profit body as part of an activity in relation to which input tax deductions have been claimed are subject to output tax unless an election has been made by the non-profit body to keep the asset out of the GST base. Refund of excise duty — s 5(13A) A supply of services is made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity when a registered person receives a refund of excise duty paid out of the Crown Bank Account under the Land Transport Management Act 2003 to the extent the duty is incurred with the intention of using the supply for making taxable supplies. Subrogation payments — s 5(13B) A subrogation payment is a payment made by a third party to an insurer in respect of a liability owed by the third party to the insured person.  Such payments are subject to GST. The payment is deemed to be consideration for a supply of services performed by the insurer in the course of the insurer’s taxable activity. The supply is deemed to be performed on the day payment is received by the insurer. Law: GST s 5  ¶32-024 Taxable activity defined Registration is available (or required) only if a person carries on, or intends to carry on, a “taxable activity”. As a general rule, supplies may be charged with tax only if they are made in the course or furtherance of a “taxable activity”. Thus, what constitutes a taxable activity is important. The elements of a taxable activity Under the Act, the term “taxable activity” means: Any activity which is carried on continuously or regularly by any person, whether or not for a pecuniary profit, and involves or is intended to involve, in whole or in part, the supply of goods and services to any other person for a consideration; and includes any such activity carried on in the form of a business, trade, manufacture, profession, vocation, association, or club: In addition, the activities of a public or local authority or a public purpose Crown-controlled company are also specifically provided to constitute a taxable activity. The elements of the definition are that there is an “activity”, that the activity is carried on “continuously or regularly” and that the activity “involves (or is intended to involve) the supply of goods and services to any other person for a consideration”. A business, for example, generally would amount to a taxable activity. The definition does not exclude activities carried on outside New Zealand. Each of the three specified elements is discussed below. Activity The word “activity”, while not defined in the Act, appears to be given a broad construction. It has been described in Newman v C of IR (1994)  16 NZTC 11,229 (HC) at 11,233 as “an occupation, a pursuit … things that a person, animal or group chooses to do … a course of conduct or series of acts which a person has chosen to undertake or become engaged in”. The word “activity” was examined in Bayly Trust v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,559 where the High Court noted that the word “activity” involves the concept of a person doing something, being active, or taking some action. Continuity or regularity The Taxation Review Authority interpreted the phrase “continuously and regularly” in Case N27 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,229: ▪ “Continuously” means that the “activity has not ceased in a permanent sense, or has not been interrupted in a significant way … The object and purpose of any physical break in the activity may be of importance in determining whether or not the activity is being carried on continuously.” (Judge Bathgate at 3,238–3,239.) ▪ “Regularly” embodies “a steadiness or uniformity of action, or occurrence of action, so that it recurs or is repeated at fairly fixed times, or at generally uniform intervals, to be of a habitual nature and character.” (Judge Bathgate at 3,239.) The frequency of repetition appears to be a significant factor in determining whether the activity is carried on continuously or regularly. The two words are therefore complementary: “regularly” being concerned with repeated exercises and “continuously” with an ongoing project or projects. Supply for consideration Though the goods and services must be supplied for a consideration, the purpose of the supply is immaterial. The activity need not be carried on for profit. The intention to make a pecuniary profit is expressly excluded from the definition of a taxable activity. This element of the definition of “taxable activity” extends its meaning beyond business activities. Non-profit organisations, for example, may  therefore carry on a taxable activity if goods or services are supplied for a consideration (ie payment is not an unconditional gift: see ¶32027). Thus, a taxable activity is not the same as a business under the Income Tax Act 2007. The actual supply of goods and services is not necessary. A mere intention to supply goods and services for a consideration will satisfy this aspect of the definition, even though the consideration may not be received later by the supplier. Exclusions from taxable activity Certain activities are specifically provided not to be taxable. Accordingly, people cannot register (or charge GST) in respect of them. The relevant activities are: ▪ private recreational pursuits or hobbies (whether carried on by natural persons, or by non-natural persons such as companies) ▪ occupation as an employee and company directorships (other than occupations and directorships accepted in the course of the person’s own taxable activity), subject to s 6(4) in relation to directors’ fees: see ¶32-061 ▪ occupation or employment in certain positions (including as an MP, the Governor-General, as chairman or member of a local authority or statutory or other board, a judge, Solicitor-General, Controller, Auditor-General or Ombudsman), and ▪ activities to the extent to which they involve the making of exempt supplies. Private recreational pursuit or hobby A taxable activity does not include “any activity carried on essentially as a private recreational pursuit or hobby”. Judge Bathgate stated in Case N27 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,229 at 3,240 that this phrase requires “in essence, a private pastime or pursuit carried on for the personal refreshment, pleasure or recreation of the person (or persons) concerned”. A business organised in a coherent fashion to achieve a  pecuniary profit cannot fall within the exclusion. In addition, Judge Bathgate considered that: ▪ “essentially” emphasises the necessity for the activity being clearly a private recreational pursuit or hobby, and ▪ “private” means, for natural persons, a recreational pursuit or hobby enjoyed by one person or with other persons with a similar interest. An activity carried on by an office holder or a person in an official position is not a private activity. Commissioner’s view The Commissioner’s view of what constitutes a private recreational pursuit or hobby is reflected in a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/04, “Goods and services tax — whether a racing syndicate can be a registered person” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 36). The item considers when horse racing activities (as a standalone activity, rather than as part of a wider activity) will be excluded from being a taxable activity because they are carried on as a “private recreational pursuit or hobby”. In the Commissioner’s view, horse racing (as a stand-alone activity) will be a taxable activity where the taxpayer can establish all of the following matters: ▪ The activity is organised to achieve a pecuniary profit, and it operates in a systematic fashion that, on an objective assessment, appears to materially reduce the element that luck plays in whether any prize money is won. ▪ A significant amount of time is involved in performing the activity undertaken by the manager of the syndicate (including acquiring and managing the horses that are assisting in meeting financial imperatives and disposing of horses that are not). ▪ The syndicate or partnership is formed not for the personal interest or pleasure of the participants, but for the purpose of making a profit from the activity, and it is operated in that manner.  The Commissioner’s view is that, in the absence of these circumstances, the activity is a private recreational pursuit or hobby and is excluded from the definition of “taxable activity”. The Commissioner also released an operational position on horse racing syndicates incorrectly registered for GST (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 44). The Commissioner was aware that some horse racing syndicates had incorrectly taken the view that they were carrying on a taxable activity and registered for GST. The Commissioner did not require those taxpayers to retrospectively deregister. However, taxpayers that were not carrying on a taxable activity had to deregister on or before 30 June 2017. The Commissioner provided a number of options for determining the market value of the horse on deregistration. Law: GST s 6  ¶32-025 Time of supply for GST As a general rule, the time of supply is the earlier of: ▪ the time an invoice is issued by the supplier or the recipient, or ▪ the time any payment is received by the supplier. The time of supply is particularly relevant to persons registered on an invoice basis, as the obligation to account for GST is triggered at the time of supply. See ¶32-078. Time of invoice The time of supply for GST purposes can be triggered by the issuing of an invoice. An “invoice” is defined as “a document notifying an obligation to make payment”. The invoice should record an obligation for the recipient to pay. However, the obligation to pay does not have to be immediate and can be delayed. The time of supply will arise upon the issue of an invoice even if the due date for payment is in the future. In some instances, a supplier may issue a “conditional invoice” to a customer for a future or prospective supply before it is certain that  supply will take place. Such invoices are treated for GST purposes more like offers to the recipient to supply the goods or services for the price recorded on the conditional invoice. However, the recipient is not yet bound to purchase that supply. See further at ¶32-222. The Commissioner considers that an agreement for the sale and purchase of property does not generally constitute an invoice for the purposes of the “time of supply” rules. See further at ¶32-510. In certain circumstances, a tax invoice can be created by the recipient of the supply. See further at ¶32-155. Time of payment The time of supply for GST purposes can also be triggered by the supplier receiving payment for the supply. Example 1: The receipt of a deposit applied to the benefit of the vendor triggers the time of supply and, if the vendor is registered on an invoice basis, a liability to account for GST on the total purchase price. See Case N24 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,199 and Case L67 (1989) 11 NZTC 1,391.  Example 2: The deposit must be applied to the benefit of the vendor before a time of supply is triggered. The payment of the deposit to a stakeholder in relation to a conditional contract is not enough. See Case P75 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,504. Where a real estate agent or any other person holds the payment as a “stakeholder”, no such benefit is applied. This rule also applies where a solicitor holds a deposit as a stakeholder. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 7 at 14.  Interpretation statement IS 10/03, “GST: Time of supply — payments of deposits, including to a stakeholder”, sets out the Commissioner’s policy of the effect of the payment of a deposit on the time of supply (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 6, July 2010 at 7). The statement, which applies from 27 May 2010, considers the application of s 9(1) in relation to the payment of a deposit in the following circumstances: ▪ a payment made under an unconditional contract  ▪ a payment made under a conditional contract ▪ a payment made when no contract exists. The interpretation statement provides that, where no invoice has been issued, the receipt of a deposit will generally trigger the time of supply in both conditional and unconditional contracts. However, the time of supply will not be triggered where the deposit for a supply is received by a person as a stakeholder. Note that IS 10/03 contains a statement that a transaction giving rise to a supply was assumed where there was a binding contract between the parties. This statement prompted the Inland Revenue, to release a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 14/10: “Goods and services tax — whether a binding contract always establishes a transaction giving rise to a supply for section 9(1) purposes” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 10, November 2014 at 32). The item concludes that generally such a transaction can be assumed where there is a binding contract. However, in some circumstances, the requirements for a contract may be satisfied but the binding contract will not establish there is a transaction giving rise to a supply for s 9(1) purposes. This would be the case where the making of a supply is factually or legally impossible from the outset or becomes impossible before s 9(1) can apply to determine the time of supply, or where the contract is used to commit fraud with no intention of making a supply, or found to be void, a sham or otherwise legally ineffective. No GST consequences can attach in such circumstances. The QWBA also provides some practical guidance regarding the GST treatment of supplies that are impossible to make from the outset or become impossible to make at various points in time. For further discussion on the time of supply rules as they relate to payment of deposits and real property transactions, see ¶32-510 and ¶32-520 Law: GST ss 2(1), 9  ¶32-026 Modified time of supply for GST Modified time of supply  The general time of supply rule is modified for certain supplies. The following supplies have their own rules for determining the time of supply: ▪ Associated supplies — s 9(2)(a) Where a registered person makes a supply to an associated person, eg a child or spouse of that person, the time of supply will generally be when the service is performed or when goods are removed or made available. ▪ Coin- or token-operated devices — s 9(2)(f) The time of supply is the date that the coins are emptied from the machine by or on behalf of the supplier. ▪ Entertainment expenditure — s 21I(4) The GST time of supply for entertainment expenditure is the earlier of the date the income tax return is due (including any extension of time arrangements) or is filed. ▪ Fringe benefits — s 21I(3) The time of supply of a fringe benefit is the time that the benefit is (or is deemed to be) provided. ▪ Games of chance, instant games, lotteries and prize competitions, games in casino premises — s 9(2)(e), (g) Time of supply will usually be the date on which the first drawing of the lottery or other draw is made. For games that are conducted in casino premises, time of supply will be the time that the Casino count takes place. Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 14/13: “Goods and Services Tax — Lotteries, raffles, sweepstakes and prize competitions” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 1, February 2015 at 34), explains the GST rules and how to account for GST on the proceeds from lotteries, raffles, sweepstakes or prize competitions.  ▪ Hire agreements and periodic payments — s 9(3)(a), (c) Special rules apply if goods are supplied under an agreement to hire other than a hire purchase agreement (eg a lease or rental) or if services are supplied under an agreement or enactment that provides for periodic payments. There is deemed to be a separate supply when each periodic payment is due. The time of supply for each successive supply is the earlier of the date the payment is due or received. An invoice-based supplier has to return output tax at that time. A payments-based person is required to return output tax only to the extent that any such payment is received. (See further at ¶32-078 and ¶32-080.) Example 1: An agreement for cleaning services provides that the price, which includes $500 GST, is to be paid by five equal instalments. Output tax of $100 is to be returned by an invoice-based supplier when each instalment falls due (or any earlier payment date). A payments-based supplier needs to account for output tax only when and to the extent that payment is made.  An “agreement to hire” is an agreement for the bailment of goods for hire and includes a lease of goods and a rental agreement, but does not include an agreement under which the property in the goods passes to the bailee or that expressly contemplates that the property in the goods will pass to the bailee. It also does not include a hire purchase agreement. Finance leases will usually constitute an agreement to hire so long as there is no agreement that ownership of the goods will pass to the lessee at the end of the lease. ▪ Hire purchase agreements — s 9(3)(b) Goods and services supplied under a hire purchase agreement are deemed to be supplied at the time at which the agreement is made. Output tax is to be accounted for, and input tax entitlements arise, at that time, irrespective of whether the registered person is registered on an invoice basis or a payments  basis. GST is calculated on the “cash” price (that is, the price excluding interest and other financial charges). Example 2: A GST-registered retailer sells a vacuum cleaner to a customer on hire purchase. The retailer must account for output tax on the full purchase price (exclusive of interest and finance charges) when the hire purchase agreement is entered into.  A “hire purchase agreement” means: □ an agreement under which goods are let or hired with an option to purchase, and □ an agreement for the purchase of goods by instalment payments under which the purchaser is given possession before the total amount owing has been paid, but □ does not include an agreement described above under which property in the goods passes absolutely to the purchaser at the time of the agreement or delivery of the goods or at any time before delivery of the goods, or □ an agreement made otherwise than at retail. A hire purchase agreement also includes: □ any agreement to sell goods at retail under which the purchaser grants security over the goods to the seller for the whole or part of the purchase price and the property in the goods passes to the purchaser subject to that security □ a sale and loan arrangement in which the whole or part of the purchase price of goods bought at retail is paid out of the proceeds of a loan on the security of the goods and the loan is made by the seller or arranged by the seller and made by a money lender, and  □ any agreement in which the property that is the subject of the agreement is livestock or bloodstock. ▪ Imported services — s 9(2)(h) Under the reverse charge rules, a registered person that imports services for a taxable purpose, but later applies those services for a non-taxable purpose, is treated as supplying those services to themselves on the last day of the adjustment period that their non-taxable use becomes greater than 5%. See ¶32-410 for a discussion of the reverse charge rules. ▪ Layby sales — s 9(2)(c) The time of supply is when title passes to the recipient, ie when the goods are collected. In the event the sale is cancelled and the seller retains or recovers any money, the time of supply of the amount retained or recovered is the cancellation date. ▪ Loyalty programme operators — s 9(9), (10) Certain loyalty programme operators are allowed to defer the imposition of GST on a sale of loyalty points to another person until such time that the loyalty points are redeemed for reward. Certain requirements must be satisfied before a loyalty programme operator can defer the imposition of GST under s 9(9). Section 9(10) provides that rules allowing deferral of GST on loyalty points until the loyalty points are redeemed apply when the GST “reverse charge” rules treat the New Zealand resident purchaser of the loyalty points as supplying the points. ▪ Private and exempt use of commodities Where goods and services that are usually part of a taxable activity are applied for private or exempt purposes the supply is deemed to be made on the date the goods and services are so applied (see ¶32-088). ▪ Progress payments for building or an engineering work and for goods supplied progressively — s 9(3)(aa)  Time of supply will be the earlier of the time a progress payment is made, is due or an invoice is issued in respect of the progress payment. This rule applies where goods are supplied progressively under an agreement that provides for periodic payments or where goods and services are so supplied directly in the construction, major reconstruction, manufacture, or extension of a building or an engineering work. Typically work will be paid for by instalments in direct connection to progress of the work. ▪ Public authorities — s 9(7) A public authority is deemed to have made a supply where an amount is brought to charge as revenue from the Crown. This supply is deemed to take place in the taxable period in which the bringing to charge applies. ▪ Race bets and sports betting — s 9(2)(d) The time of supply made by TAB NZ (before 1 August 2020, the Racing Industry Transition Agency) or its agent to secure a bet is the time the money is “dealt with” under the relevant legislation; that is, the time that it is established for GST purposes that a supply has been made. ▪ Rates demands issued by local authorities — s 9(8) Time of supply for rates demands issued by local authorities will be the earlier of: □ the date the instalment notice issued if the notice requires payment of an instalment by a particular date □ the date on which the notice requires payment, or □ the date on which payment is received. ▪ Supplies where the price is not determined — s 9(6) Where the whole of the consideration (the price) is not known at the time of the agreement and a supply is made under the agreement before the price is determined, the supply is treated  as more than one supply, with a supply treated as being made, to the extent of a part of the price, when payment is made or an invoice is issued for the part of the price (whichever is earlier). ▪ Tokens, stamps and vouchers — s 9(2A), (2B) A supplier should treat stamps, tokens or vouchers as a supply for GST purposes at the time a customer buys them. Generally, a supply takes place when tokens, stamps and vouchers are issued, not when the vouchers are redeemed. However, if s 5(11G) applies, the time of supply is at redemption. See ¶32-023. ▪ Uninvited direct sales — s 9(2)(b) The time of supply is the day after the five working day period within which the recipient may cancel the sale (under s 36M of the Fair Trading Act 1986). Law: GST ss 9, 21I(3), (4)  ¶32-027 Value of supply for GST The value of a supply is significant because it is the amount upon which GST is calculated. For example, $15 GST is charged if the value of the supply is $100. Calculating the value of supply Section 10(2) provides the following formula for calculating the value of supply: value of supply + tax charged = consideration (as defined) Consideration In most situations a supplier will require payment in money. In these cases, “consideration” for the supply will usually be the agreed GSTinclusive price. This price is called “consideration in money”. It appears that payment by means of an exchange rather than in money will still constitute “consideration in money” if the goods tendered in exchange are stated as having a precise monetary value.  Occasionally the consideration might be only partly expressed in money or might not be expressed in money at all. For example, a shopkeeper might not charge his window-cleaner for certain supplies. If those supplies are not expressed as having a precise monetary value, reference must be made to the “open market value” of the supply to set the consideration or to make up the deficiency between the market price and the price charged. See Case T11 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,064. Open market value Consideration is determined by reference to the open market value if goods and services are supplied: ▪ at no, or inadequate, consideration, or ▪ for a consideration other than money. Generally, the open market value is the price (including GST) that similar goods and services would fetch in similar circumstances if the supply was freely made and the parties to the transaction were not associated persons. Inland Revenue (IR) sets out the criteria in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 14, June 1995 at 6. If the open market value cannot be ascertained, the Commissioner is empowered to fix the value. Book value is not an appropriate basis. Like “consideration”, “open market value” is always a GST-inclusive amount. Definition of “consideration” The definition in s 2(1) extends the ordinary meaning of the word; it does not have the same meaning that it has in general contract law. The definition requires that the “consideration” be provided “in respect of, in response to, or for the inducement of, the supply of goods and services”. It has been held that the phrase “in respect of” imports the notion of connection or relationship between the supply and the payment.  See Trustee, Executors and Agency Co New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,076 (HC), Chatham Islands Enterprise Trust v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,075 (CA) and Rotorua Regional Airport Ltd v C of IR (2010) 24 NZTC 23,979 (HC). Unconditional gift Note that the definition of “consideration” specifically excludes any payment made by any person as an unconditional gift to any nonprofit body. An “unconditional gift” is defined in s 2(1) and requires a voluntary payment made for the purposes of the non-profit body in respect of which no identifiable direct valuable benefit arises in the form of a supply of goods or services to the donor or an associated person. If a payment made to a GST-registered non-profit body is an “unconditional gift”, it is not “consideration” for a supply and is not subject to GST. In December 2020, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 20/09, “Goods and services tax – unconditional gifts”, which provides guidance on the meaning of “unconditional gift”. In summary, the statement reaches the following conclusions regarding an “unconditional gift”: ▪ A payment made to a non-profit body is an unconditional gift where: □ the payment is voluntarily made for the carrying on or carrying out of the non-profit body’s purposes, and □ no “identifiable direct valuable benefit” in the form of a supply of goods and services to the payer (or an associated person) arises or may arise in respect of the payment. ▪ Unconditional gifts generally do not include payments made to a non-profit body under a statutory or other legal obligation, including payments made under contractual obligations. This is because those payments are not usually considered to be voluntarily made, given they are required to be made. They are not made from a person’s own free will. However, a payment made under a sense of moral obligation may still be regarded as being voluntarily made.  ▪ An “identifiable direct valuable benefit” is an advantage or gain in the form of a supply of goods or services to the payer (or an associate of the payer) that is: □ clearly able to be defined or identified □ sufficiently closely connected to the payment □ useful, important and of real value □ capable of being valued, and □ not of only nominal worth. ▪ The benefit must not be in the form of a supply of goods or services to the payer (or an associated person) “in respect of” the payment. Where the benefit will arise regardless of whether the payment is made, there will not be a sufficient link between the benefit and the payment. However, where there is a sufficient link, the payment is not an “unconditional gift”. ▪ It is sufficient that an identifiable direct valuable benefit “arises or may arise”. This means that the benefit need not arise when the payment is made, instead the benefit can arise in the future or be contingent on a future event or action occurring after the payment is made. ▪ Amounts donated to a non-profit body for a specified purpose with stipulations as to how the funds are to be used may be unconditional gifts, provided no identifiable direct valuable benefit arises or may arise in the form of a supply of goods and services for the payer (or an associated person). ▪ Where a single supply of goods or services is made for an agreed consideration it cannot be split into two parts - with one part being an unconditional gift (and not subject to GST) and the other part being consideration for a supply of goods and services (and subject to GST). The value of a supply is determined by the consideration paid, and there is no ability under the Act for a  portion of the agreed consideration to be notionally treated as an unconditional gift. Examples of calculation of value of supply The following examples illustrate the application of the formula value of supply + tax charged = consideration. The examples assume that the supplies are made on or after 1 October 2010. Example 1: Consideration expressed in monetary terms The consideration for the supply is expressed to be $920. Tax charged on the supply is $120. Value of supply + $120 = $920 Value of supply = $800  Example 2: Consideration not expressed in monetary terms The open market value of the consideration is $920. Value of supply + $120 = $920 Value of supply = $800  Example 3: Consideration expressed partly in monetary terms The consideration is stated to be partly in money: “$460 (including $60 GST)”. The other part of the consideration is not expressed in monetary terms, but the goods to which the consideration relates have an open market value of $920. Value of supply + tax = $460 (the consideration in money) plus $460 (the open market value) Value of supply + $120 = $920 Value of supply = $800  In most situations a supplier will charge market prices and GST will be calculated on the contract or market price. Where there is some non-  monetary consideration GST is calculated on the market value of that component. Therefore, the general rule is that GST is calculated on the purchase or contract price plus any non-monetary consideration. Occasionally, this rule will require modification. Accordingly, special rules apply to: ▪ supplies made between associated persons — s 10(3) ▪ the cancellation of layby sales — s 10(9) ▪ a business that ceases to be registered — s 10(7A) ▪ a business that ceases to be registered and the goods and services were acquired before 1 October 1986 — s 10(8) ▪ supplies of accommodation in commercial dwellings or residential establishments — s 10(6) ▪ credit contracts — s 10(5) ▪ distantly taxable goods — s 10(7C), (7D), (7E) ▪ exported secondhand goods and secondhand goods sold overseas — s 10(4) ▪ fringe benefits — s 10(7) ▪ games in casino premises — s 10(15A) ▪ games of chance, instant games, lotteries and prize competitions — s 10(14) ▪ supplies of remote services by marketplace operators — s 10(7D) ▪ supplies by local authorities — s 10(11) ▪ mixed taxable and non-taxable supplies — s 10(18) ▪ supplies by a public authority to the Crown — s 10(10)  ▪ racing and sports betting — s 10(12), (13), and ▪ supplies made for no consideration — s 10(19). For the value of supply rules for imported services, see ¶32-430. Associated supplies A supply of goods and services from a registered person to an associated party is subject to special valuation rules. The general rule is that the consideration for the supply is deemed to be the open market value of the supply. However, the open market value rule does not apply to supplies between associated persons where: ▪ the associated person is an employee of the supplier and the supply is a fringe benefit ▪ the price paid exceeds the open market value of the supply (see Case M110 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,704) ▪ the recipient is entitled to claim an input tax deduction, or would have been entitled to do so if the supplier had been registered, or ▪ the consideration is nil, and from the time of supply, the recipient applies the goods and services for the making of taxable supplies. See s 10(3), (3A), (3AB). Example 4: Pat is GST registered and uses a car in the course of her business. She sells the car to her son for $500 (although the car’s market value is $4,000). Pat must account for GST of 3/23 of $4,000. (See s 10(3).)  Example 5: In the same fact situation as Example 4, if Pat’s son is also GST registered and has purchased the car for business purposes, Pat’s output tax liability would be 3/23 of $500. (See s 10(3A).)  Deregistering for GST A supply is deemed to be made if a person ceases to be registered and holds goods and services forming part of the assets of a taxable activity (see ¶32-023). The consideration for such a supply is the open market value of the supply. Note that on deregistration goods or services acquired before 1 October 1986 are valued at the lesser of cost or market value. All goods or services acquired after the introduction of GST must be valued at the current market value. This ensures that taxpayers cannot deregister for GST purposes and pay GST at the historical cost rather than the current value that would apply if those goods or services had been supplied by the taxpayer while they were still registered: see Thompson v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-041 (CA). Example 6: Bruce and Shelly purchased a farm in 1984 for $95,000. They registered for GST when GST was introduced in 1986. They are now winding down their taxable activity and want to deregister. The farm has a market value of $450,000. Bruce and Shelly’s output tax liability is 3/23 of $95,000.  Example 7: Under the same scenario as Example 6, with the exception that the farm was purchased in 1988, not 1984, Bruce and Shelly’s output tax liability would be 3/23 of $450,000.  Law: GST ss 2(1), 4, 10  ¶32-028 GST on late payment fees Late payment fees are fixed fees charged by businesses to their customers on late payment of accounts. For example, a telephone company may charge its customers a set fee for the cost of administration if they do not pay their monthly telephone bill on time. The fees are different from penalty and default interest payments,  which are specifically GST-exempt in the same way as other financial transactions. Section 5(25) and (26) clarify that late payment fees charged by businesses to customers are subject to GST. Because late payment fees are technically considered to be an increase in consideration for the underlying good or service (thereby triggering the credit/debit note provisions), the late payment fee is treated as a separate supply. Therefore, debit notes are not required to be issued. The tax treatment of the late payment fee will take on the same nature as the underlying good or service. So if the underlying good or service is an exempt supply, the late payment fee will also be an exempt supply for GST purposes. To provide guidance on the boundary between the late payment fee and penalty or default interest under s 14(3)(a), s 5(25) clarifies that the subsection does not apply to penalty or default interest, or a charge in the nature of a penalty or default interest, that is imposed under a contract for the supply of goods and services or an enactment. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 10, December 2012 at 40. Law: GST ss 5(25), (26), 14(3)(a)  ZERO-RATED SUPPLIES FOR GST ¶32-030 Types of zero-rated supplies Classification of zero-rated supplies Sections 11, 11A, 11AB, 11B and 11C of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 provide for the imposition of 0% GST. The relevant supplies can be classified as ones of: ▪ Goods under s 11 (see ¶32-032): □ exported goods □ sealed bag goods and goods sold by duty-free shops  □ goods due to be exported □ certain sales of boats and aircraft □ goods for consumption on aircraft, yachts or ships outside New Zealand □ goods applied in respect of temporary imports □ goods situated overseas at the time of supply and either the goods are not situated in New Zealand at the time of delivery to the recipient and/or the goods are not distantly taxable goods and GST is paid by the recipient on the importation of the goods into New Zealand □ distantly taxable goods to which s 60(1C)(a) applies, being a supply from an underlying supplier to an operator of a marketplace (see ¶32-064) □ taxable activities disposed of as going concerns (see ¶32035) □ newly refined precious metal □ tools used in New Zealand solely to manufacture goods that will be for export from New Zealand and supplied to an unregistered non-resident □ a supply of land made by a registered person to another registered person who acquired the goods with the intention of using them for making taxable supplies (see ¶32-505) □ goods supplied to or by the Crown as consideration for the zero-rated transfer or surrender of an emissions unit except for a transfer by the Crown under a project to reduce emissions or under a negotiated greenhouse agreement. ▪ “Exported” services and some “business-to-business” financial services under s 11A (see ¶32-034):  □ international transportation and freight □ services connected with offshore realty □ services relating to offshore personal property □ certain services connected with goods in transit □ services performed outside New Zealand □ certain services supplied to non-residents □ services relating to exported goods □ services provided to an offshore warrantor □ services relating to offshore intellectual property rights □ offshore restraint of trade agreements □ some business-to-business supplies of financial services (see ¶32-300) □ the transfer of an emissions unit (other than a transfer by the Crown under a project to reduce emissions or a negotiated greenhouse agreement) or the surrender of an emissions unit, and services supplied as consideration for such a transfer or surrender, and the sale or disposal of certain other units relating to human-induced greenhouse gases □ services supplied directly in connection with tools used in New Zealand solely to manufacture goods that will be for export from New Zealand and supplied to an unregistered non-resident, and □ cross-border remote services supplied by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand-resident registered persons if the supplier so chooses (see ¶32-067). ▪ Certain cross-border telecommunications services under s 11AB.  ▪ Certain supplies made and received by territorial and local authorities under s 11B. ▪ Certain supplies by operators of loyalty programmes under s 11C. Zero-rating applies only if the supply would otherwise be taxable at the standard rate. Supplies that are taxed at either the standard rate or 0% are termed “taxable supplies”. Zero-rated supplies explained The zero-rating of the above supplies reflects two considerations: that the effect of GST is to be limited to New Zealand, and that GST is not to be charged arbitrarily at a standard rate. The zero-rating of supplies of exported goods, goods situated overseas, and “exported” services results from a basic principle that the tax should not increase the price of overseas supplies. The GST regime is thus to be effectively confined to New Zealand. The zero-rating of the supply of taxable activities as a going concern, of newly refined precious metal, and of certain minor indirect taxes reflects a different consideration: that GST should not produce arbitrary results by being imposed at the current standard rate. Zero-rating part of a supply One part of a supply may be charged with the standard rate of GST and the other part 0%. For example, a taxable supply of services might be partly performed in New Zealand and partly performed outside this country. Here the supply is “split” and GST is calculated on each separate component. Similarly, a sale of land may involve an area that is subject to a leasing activity and an adjacent entirely bare and unused area of land. In this case the land with the leasing activity might comprise a zerorated going concern transaction, while the bare land (not part of the leasing activity) would be subject to a full GST impost. See Case N38 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,322 and C of IR v Smiths City Group Ltd (1992) 14 NZTC 9,140 (HC). Section 5(14) provides that where a supply is charged with tax in part under s 8 and in part under s 11, 11A, 11AB, 11B or 11C, each part is  deemed to be a separate supply. Two separate supplies are deemed to occur in supplies of dwellings with other real property (such as the supply of a farm with a farmhouse or the supply of a commercial building with a dwelling attached). The consideration for the supply in this situation must be apportioned in respect of each supply. Section 5(15) provides that a supply of a principal place of residence or a supply of land that falls under s 14(1)(d) is deemed to be separate from the supply of any other real property included in the supply. See further at ¶32-555. Law: GST ss 5(14), 11, 11A, 11AB, 11B  ¶32-032 GST and exported goods A taxable supply of exported goods is usually charged with tax at the rate of 0%. The supply can be zero-rated pursuant to either of two statutory criteria: goods that have been exported and goods that will be exported. In either circumstance, the supplier must be the party who exports or will export the goods for zero-rated status to apply. See Case P55 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,382 which confirms this requirement. Goods that have been exported GST is charged at the rate of 0% on a taxable supply of goods if the supplier: ▪ has entered the goods for export, or the goods have been deemed to be entered for export, and ▪ the goods have been exported by the supplier, or ▪ the supplier has satisfied the Commissioner that the goods have been exported by the supplier to a place outside New Zealand. The provision will be used, generally, if goods are exported before the “time of supply”, although it is not limited to that occasion.  Inland Revenue (IR) requires evidence of export, such as the customs export entry, international parcel customs declaration, delivery evidence (eg bill of lading showing export by sea or air waybill for export by air), packing list, delivery note or purchase order showing overseas delivery address, insurance documents. The exporter should retain the relevant records as GST records. Where goods have been exported but the necessary documentation has not been completed, that is, the goods have neither been entered nor deemed to be entered for export, they may still attract zero-rating if the Commissioner so determines. There are no prescribed guidelines for the exercise of this discretion, which is subject to a right of objection. Goods to be exported Goods that are to be exported may also be zero-rated. The focus is on whether the goods will be exported as a condition of or in the course of making the supply. The residence of the recipient is irrelevant. This provision is used when the time of supply precedes the exporting of the goods. The supplier need not retain ownership of the goods until they are exported; the supplier is only required to enter them for export. Generally, goods that will be exported can be zero-rated only if they are exported within 28 days of the “time of supply”. The Commissioner has discretion to extend that time frame if circumstances beyond the control of the supplier and the recipient prevent the goods being exported within the 28 days or, because of the nature of the supply, it is not practicable for the goods to be exported within 28 days of the “time of supply”. The standard GST rate applies if the goods are not exported within 28 days of the time of supply or such further period as the Commissioner allows. QB 15/14, “Goods and Services Tax — Progress payments on boats to be exported by supplier” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1, February 2016 at 73), deals with the Commissioner’s discretion in this regard. The item considers when a GST-registered boat builder can zero-rate progress payments made by an overseas buyer for the  construction of a boat that will be entered for export (or deemed to be entered for export) by the supplier. The item notes that where an agreement provides for progress payments to be made periodically during the term of the agreement, each payment will have its own time of supply. Therefore, the first progress payment will trigger the 28-day export requirement and this requirement is unlikely to be satisfied. Therefore, a supplier wishing to zero-rate the supply will need to apply to the Commissioner for an extension of the 28-day requirement. The application should be made before the end of the first 28-day period. The application must be in writing and should include relevant documents (including the supply contract), the date construction is intended to be completed and the intended date of export. Each application will be considered on a case-by-case basis. However, the item states that the Commissioner will usually grant an extension in this situation. Where an extension is granted, the supply can be zero-rated as long as export occurs within the term of the extension. The QWBA also notes that the same principles will apply to other engineering works that involve progress payments and where the goods will ultimately be exported. Impact of COVID-19 virus on 28-day export requirement In response to the outbreak of COVID-19, IR issued a public statement on an extension to the period for zero-rating of exported goods. IR acknowledged that many customers may not have been able to meet the 28-day period to export goods at a zero-rate. The Commissioner already has the discretion to extend the 28-day period if: ▪ there are circumstances beyond the control of the exporter and importer that prevent the goods from being exported within the 28-day period, or ▪ it is not practicable for the exporter to export the goods or a class of goods within the 28-day period due to the nature of the supply.  Although an application is normally made to IR for the extension, customers affected by COVID-19 had a three-month extension to the 28-day period for export without needing to make an application to IR. The three-month extension started on the day the 28-day period expired and applied to a supply of goods up to and including 31 July 2020. Applications still need to be made to IR for extensions for any supplies that occur after 31 July 2020. Example 1: Automatic three-month extension from expiry of 28 days Joe owns a marine supplies business that exports overseas. Joe received notification that the ports in China were closing and there would be significant delays. Joe’s 28-day time frame for exporting sails to a Chinese business expired on 2 April 2020. Without needing to make an application to the Commissioner, Joe has an extension to 2 July 2020.  Example 2: Automatic three-month extension from time of supply Tim makes and exports toys to order. On 20 March 2020, before the lockdown, the time of supply was triggered for an export to the United States. Tim does not run an essential service and he is unable to access his factory to make the toys for the export order. Because of the delay in manufacturing, Tim is unable to export the toys within the 28-day period. Without needing to make an application to Inland Revenue, Tim has an extension to 20 June 2020.  Example 3: No automatic extension if not impacted by COVID-19 Mary works from home, making and exporting hand-made musical instruments. In her situation, and in relation to her particular exports, she has not been affected by Covid19 delays. She is not entitled to a three-month extension without making an application to Inland Revenue. In her situation she needs to make an application for an extension if there are any other circumstances beyond her control or reasons why it is not practical for her to export within 28 days  Further extensions for more than three months can be applied for in the normal way under s 11(5) and will be considered on a case-bycase basis. IR will consider the additional or industry-specific circumstances that are beyond the control of the exporter and importer and that prevent the goods from being exported within the  initial three-month extension period. Records should be kept to justify any extension. Example 4: Application for an extension for more than three months Hema exports valuable artworks. Because of individual circumstances, meaning that export must be highly secure, Hema is advised that delays will be more significant for some valuable paintings she is exporting. Hema contacts Inland Revenue and they agree that an extension for longer than three months is acceptable in this case. Hema is granted an extension of six months. Her 28-day period would have expired on 4 May 2020, but she is granted an extension to 4 November 2020 after making an application.  Exported secondhand goods To reduce the tax base risks identified with zero-rating exported secondhand goods, an anti-avoidance measure is included. Section 11(3C) requires GST to be charged if all of the following events have taken place: ▪ the exported goods were previously zero-rated ▪ the goods are subsequently imported into New Zealand ▪ the goods are reacquired by the exporter in a condition that is substantially the same as when the goods were zero-rated, and ▪ the exporter had claimed a secondhand goods input tax deduction in connection with the original export of the goods. Section 11(3D) provides that s 11(3C) applies at the time the goods are reacquired unless GST is imposed under s 12 when the goods are subsequently imported into New Zealand. Goods in transit, temporary imports and to-be-exported goods Zero-rated status can apply to supplies of goods in relation to goods in transit or temporary imports. Services provided in relation to such commodities might also be zero-rated (see ¶32-034). The supply of goods to a non-resident in relation to goods in transit or temporary imports is zero-rated if all the following conditions apply:  ▪ the goods are supplied in the course of repairing, renovating, modifying or treating the goods in transit or temporary import, and ▪ the goods are incorporated into the goods in transit or temporary import, or (being consumable goods) become unusable or worthless as a result of being used in the repair, etc. Hence, zero-rated status applies to the supply of items such as motor oil, engines, and ropes used in rigging if they are supplied to a nonresident and will be installed on that person’s temporary imported yacht. IR requires the supplier retain adequate records to support any such zero-rating. These might include: ▪ a copy of the non-resident’s passport ▪ a copy of the relevant New Zealand Customs temporary import entry permit, and ▪ details of the goods supplied and evidence to show that they became part of the temporary import. The zero-rating also applies to goods and services supplied in relation to newly purchased boats and aircraft that are to be exported under their own power in the same manner as for temporarily imported boats and aircraft. Goods that are supplied in the course of repairing, renovating, modifying or treating a to-be-exported boat or aircraft and are incorporated into that boat or aircraft, or (being consumable goods) become unusable or worthless, are zero-rated. Services supplied in relation to these boats and aircraft are also zero-rated (see ¶32-034). Boats and aircraft Zero-rated status applies where a boat or aircraft is sold and exported under its own power to a place out of New Zealand by the purchaser within 60 days of possession being assumed by the purchaser (or his or her agent). See s 11(1)(i) and (7).  The supplier must keep the following documentation to support zerorating: ▪ a written statement from the purchaser that the boat (or aircraft) is not intended for use within New Zealand and that the boat (or aircraft) will be exported from New Zealand ▪ a written statement from the purchaser that the boat (or aircraft) will not be hired, given away, offered for sale, used as security or otherwise disposed of while it is in New Zealand ▪ a record of the sale, and ▪ a copy of the clearance document issued to the purchaser by New Zealand Customs upon leaving New Zealand (Regulation Form 8 — Certificate of Clearance) or other documentation that proves that the boat (or aircraft) has left New Zealand. The supplier can make a written application to the Commissioner to have the 60-day period extended under s 11(8) if circumstances beyond the control of the supplier and recipient prevent, or will prevent, the export of the boat or aircraft within the period. The Commissioner may also, on the written application of the supplier, extend the 60-day period if the inability to export the boat or aircraft within the period relates to the recipient acquiring goods that are incorporated into the boat or aircraft, or consumed, as part of a repair, renovation or modification, or services supplied directly in connection with the boat or aircraft. Sealed bag system for overseas travellers Zero-rating applies to goods supplied to overseas travellers pursuant to the sealed bag system that are entered or deemed to be entered for export. The duty-free goods are placed in a sealed bag that is uplifted by the traveller. The purchase is evidenced as having been exported by the plucking of a sales docket from the sealed bag by an agent of the duty-free shop when the passenger enters the departure lounge at an international airport. Sales will be charged with GST at the standard  rate if they cannot be evidenced as having been exported in the sealed bag by the matching of dockets between the airport and dutyfree shop. Agent may be treated as the principal An agent in very limited circumstances may be treated as if he or she was the principal for exports of goods. See s 60(6). This confers the benefits of the zero-rating of the supply on the agent by deeming that agent (and not the principal) to have received the supply. An export agent may accordingly recover GST charged on inputs that facilitate the export of goods purchased by a non-resident, as if they were incurred on the agent’s own behalf and not the nonresident’s. The agent may be treated as the principal only if: ▪ the agent is a registered person ▪ the agent “receives” (rather than makes) the supply ▪ the supply received by the agent is charged with the standard rate of GST ▪ the principal is not resident in New Zealand and is not a registered person, and ▪ the principal and agent agree that is to be the case. Any inquiry as to whether the supply of exported goods meets the requirements for zero-rated status should be addressed to IR rather than the New Zealand Customs Service. Tooling costs Section 11(1)(p) allows GST-registered manufacturers to zero-rate the supply of certain tooling costs charged to a non-resident customer. Previously, when a New Zealand manufacturer charged a nonresident purchaser for the cost of specialised tools necessary to fulfil their order, these tooling costs could not be zero-rated. The tools are used to make exported products that are zero-rated, but because the  tools themselves are not exported the manufacturers had to charge GST on the tooling component of the order. Amendments made ensure that, provided the tools are supplied to a non-resident that is not a registered person and they are used solely to manufacture exported goods, the supply of the tools will be zero-rated. Law: GST ss 11, 60(6)  ¶32-034 GST and exported services The taxable supply of what can loosely be termed “exported” services is charged with GST at the rate of 0%. International transportation and freight, including the insurance of and arranging for such transportation and freight — s 11A(1) (a)–(d), (1D) This section zero-rates the transportation of passengers or goods to or from New Zealand and between overseas destinations. GST is also charged at 0% on domestic flights provided by the same supplier as part of a passenger’s international air travel and on any domestic component of international freight supplied by the same supplier. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 5, May 1998 at 8. This also applies to the domestic legs of international passenger cruises if either the first place of departure or the final destination is a cruise outside New Zealand. Note that zero-rating under s 11A(1)(a), (c) and (d) (relating to the transport, insurance or arranging of transport or insurance, of passengers or goods in certain circumstances) does not apply to a supply by a registered redeliverer and supplier under s 60E of services in relation to a taxable supply of distantly taxable goods. Services connected with domestic transport services supplied to non-residents — s 11A(1)(cb), (1D) Zero-rated status is accorded to the transport of household goods within New Zealand, including ancillary transport activities, provided that: ▪ the services are supplied to a non-resident outside New Zealand at the time the service is performed  ▪ the goods are entered for home consumption under the Customs and Excise Act 2018 ▪ the supply arrangement is made before the goods are entered, and ▪ the services are expected to be completed within 28 days of the goods being entered. Note that zero-rating under this provision does not apply to a supply by a registered redeliverer and supplier under s 60E of services in relation to a taxable supply of distantly taxable goods. Services directly connected with offshore realty — s 11A(1)(e) GST is charged at the rate of 0% on services provided directly in connection with overseas land and buildings. Examples include a New Zealand architect designing a sports stadium to be built in Australia. The supply is zero-rated for GST because it is for services provided directly in connection with overseas land and buildings. Services supplied in connection with land outside New Zealand, or an improvement to such land, are also zero-rated when they are intended to enable or assist a change in the physical condition, or ownership or other legal status, of the land or improvement. The provision applies to a variety of professional services, such as architectural, legal or real estate agents’ services as part of a land transaction, where the outcome is to change the legal nature of the land but the services do not involve any physical change or connection to the land (and therefore previously could have been argued to fall outside the “directly in connection” test discussed below). Example 1: Maraina is looking to purchase an apartment in Brussels so that she can be closer to Melissa, her twin sister. Maraina engages a New Zealand-resident lawyer, Gordon, to act for her in a transaction to acquire an apartment. Gordon’s services are in connection with land outside New Zealand and are intended to enable a change in the legal nature of the offshore land. His services are therefore zero-rated under section 11A(1)(e). Maraina’s residency status or location does not affect the application of the rule for services connected with land outside New Zealand. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 84.  In December 2018, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement, IS 18/07, “GST — zero-rating of services related to land”, which considers this test. See discussion under s 11A(1)(k) below. Services (or the arranging of services) directly connected with offshore movable personal property (other than choses in action) — s 11A(1)(f), (jbb), (1D) Services, or the arranging of services, directly connected with moveable personal property outside New Zealand when the services are performed are zero-rated. For example, a New Zealand company provides insurance cover to a New Zealand resident for a yacht he keeps in Fiji. Note that zero-rating under this provision does not apply to a supply by a registered redeliverer and supplier under s 60E of services in relation to a taxable supply of distantly taxable goods. Services provided to overseas postal organisations — s 11A(1) (g) Services provided to overseas postal organisations are zero-rated if they are for the delivery of postal articles within New Zealand that have been mailed overseas. Services supplied in connection with goods in transit and temporary imports — s 11A(1)(h), (i) Services provided directly in connection with goods in transit from outside New Zealand or a temporary import are zero-rated. To qualify for zero-rating status, the goods must not be removed from the ship or aircraft in which they arrived. A temporary import entry is granted if goods are brought into New Zealand for less than 12 months. Services such as painting, mechanical work, or hull repairs carried out to a temporarily imported yacht are zero-rated for GST. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 11, November 1998 at 22 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 12, December 2000 at 23. Services supplied in connection with boats and aircraft to be exported — s 11A(1)(ib)  Services provided directly in connection with newly purchased boats and aircraft to be exported under their own power are zero-rated. This aligns the treatment of newly purchased to-be-exported boats and aircraft with that provided for temporarily imported boats and aircraft. Services (or the arranging of services) performed outside New Zealand — s 11A(1)(j), (jb), (1B), (1C) Services, or the arranging of services, physically performed outside New Zealand. This would apply when a New Zealand resident entertainer performs a tour overseas. Their services, and their agent’s services in arranging the tour, are zero-rated, being physically performed outside New Zealand. The provisions do not apply to a supply of services treated by the reverse charge rules as being made in New Zealand unless the nature of the services is such that they can only be physically received at the time and place at which the services are physically performed. Services from underlying supplier to operator of a marketplace — s 11A(1)(jc) When a supply of remote services made through a marketplace is treated as two separate supplies under s 60(1C), the supply of services from the underlying supplier to an operator of a marketplace under s 60(1C)(a) is zero-rated under s 11A(1)(jc) (see ¶32-067). Services supplied to non-residents — s 11A(1)(k), (2), (3), (3B) Zero-rated status is accorded to services supplied to persons who are not resident in New Zealand and who are outside New Zealand when the services are performed. It does not apply to services supplied directly in connection with land in New Zealand, or any improvements to the land, or moveable personal property situated in New Zealand at the time the services are performed. It also does not apply to restraint of trade agreements. A wide range of services, in particular professional services that closely relate to land in New Zealand, are subject to GST under s 11A(1)(k). The services that are not zero-rated are expanded to include services that are supplied in connection with land in New Zealand, or any improvement to the land, and are intended to enable  or assist a change in the physical condition, or ownership or other legal status, of the land or improvement. Example 2: Cynthia is a British resident who is looking at buying a holiday home in New Zealand. While still based in her home in London, she seeks general information from a New Zealand-based property valuation firm on the range of prevailing property market values for each region that she is considering in order to determine which potential areas are affordable for her budget. She also engages a New Zealand-based accountancy firm to advise her on the general tax implications of investing in land in New Zealand. Several weeks later, after returning to London from a short trip to New Zealand to look at potential properties, Cynthia decides to submit a tender (through a real estate agent) for an empty lot of land in the Coromandel, where she intends to construct a holiday home. Before submitting the tender, she engages a New Zealand-based solicitor to provide her with legal advice and undertake the conveyancing work. She again phones the property valuation firm — this time to ascertain the market value of the Coromandel property. After her tender is accepted by the vendor, she hires a New Zealand architect to draw up the building plans. The supply of property valuation services (relating to the New Zealand housing market generally by region) and the provision of general advice relating to the tax implications of investing in New Zealand property are both zero-rated under s 11A(1)(k). This is because neither of these services are directly connected with land, nor do they have a sufficient nexus with any specific piece of New Zealand land to be “intended to enable or assist a change in the physical condition, or ownership or other legal status” of land in New Zealand. However, the conveyancing and architectural services, the services provided by the real estate agent and the valuation services specifically relating to the Coromandel property do not qualify for zero-rating under s 11A(1)(k), as the exclusion in para (i) applies. These services are supplied in connection with specific land in New Zealand and are intended to assist or enable a change in the ownership status or physical condition of that land. These supplies are therefore charged with GST at 15%. Even if Cynthia’s tender had not been accepted by the vendor, the legal and valuation services relating to the Coromandel property would, on an objective assessment of Cynthia’s intention in respect to the Coromandel property, still be charged with GST at 15% because they are intended to assist a change in the ownership status of the land. Similarly, if Cynthia had decided not to proceed with constructing a building on the site after the plans were drawn up, the architectural services would still be charged with GST at 15% as they are related to specific land and were, at the time of supply, intended to assist a change in the physical condition of the land. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 81.  A non-resident company or unincorporated body that has a minor presence in New Zealand, or a presence that is not effectively  connected with the services provided, is “outside New Zealand” for the purposes of s 11A(1)(k). A natural person who has a minor presence in New Zealand that is not directly in connection with the supply is also “outside New Zealand” for s 11A(1)(k). Zero-rating will not apply if the performance of the services (or it is reasonably foreseeable at the time the agreement is entered into that the performance of the services) will be received in New Zealand by another person, including an employee or director of the non-resident, other than in the course of making taxable or exempt supplies. Section 11A(1)(k) is also precluded by s 8(2B) from applying to the supply of services to the extent that the supply of services consists of the “facilitation of inbound tour operations”. The “facilitation of inbound tour operations” is defined in s 8(2F). See ¶32-072. Interpretation statement In December 2018, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement, IS 18/07, “GST — zero-rating of services related to land” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 1, February 2019 at 17), which considers the tests under s 11A(1)(e) and (k). The statement begins by discussing the meaning of “non-resident” and the situations in which a non-resident will be regarded as “outside New Zealand at the time the services are performed” and considering the types of interests that are “land” and whether services can be regarded as “directly in connection” with land. The statement then considers the application of the provisions and the discussion covers: ▪ whether services are “in connection with” land ▪ whether services enable or assist a relevant change to land and the types of services and the types of changes to land that are covered, and ▪ the circumstances in which services can be regarded as having been “intended” to enable or assist such changes. The statement includes a number of examples and a non-exhaustive table of the GST treatment of particular services relating to specific land in New Zealand.  Question we’ve been asked In December 2018, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 18/15, “GST — When will goods and services supplied in connection with the repatriation of human remains from New Zealand be zero-rated?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 1, February 2019 at 39). The item concludes that a body is not property and therefore services supplied in connection with the repatriation of human remains (such as cremation and embalming services) will be zerorated where: ▪ the services are supplied to a non-resident who is outside New Zealand when the services are performed, and ▪ the remains will not be received by a third party in New Zealand (and it was not reasonably foreseeable when the contract was entered into that a third party would receive the remains in New Zealand). The standard rules for zero-rating exported goods will apply to goods supplied in relation to the repatriation of human remains, such as caskets and urns. The supply of information to non-residents — s 11A(1)(l), (2), (3) The supply of information to non-residents who are outside New Zealand when the service is performed is zero-rated if the supply is made directly in connection with moveable personal property situated in New Zealand when the service is performed. For example, a New Zealand company carries out research on blood samples in New Zealand and provides results to an overseas company with no New Zealand presence. The services are zero-rated, being information supplied to a non-resident who is outside New Zealand when the services are performed and being directly in connection with moveable personal property situated in New Zealand. As for s 11A(1)(k), zero-rating will not apply if the performance of the services will be received in New Zealand by another person, including an employee or director of the non-resident, other than in the course of making taxable or exempt supplies. The minor presence of a nonresident company or unincorporated body in New Zealand, or a  presence that is not effectively connected with the supply, will not affect the “outside New Zealand” requirement. Services directly in connection with exported goods — s 11A(1) (m) These services supplied are zero-rated if they are supplied to a nonresident who is outside New Zealand when the services are performed. For example, if a company carries out testing procedures on produce that is to be exported, the supply can be zero-rated if the recipient of the service is a non-resident. Services directly in connection with tools for exported goods — s 11A(1)(maa) Services supplied directly in connection with goods that are themselves zero-rated under s 11(1)(p) (ie tools used in New Zealand solely to manufacture goods that will be for export from New Zealand and supplied to an unregistered non-resident) can be zero-rated. The services must also be supplied to an unregistered non-resident. Services provided to an offshore warrantor — s 11A(1)(ma), (3) Zero-rating status can apply to services relating to goods under warranty to the extent that the services are: ▪ provided under the warranty ▪ supplied for consideration that is given by a warrantor who is a non-resident, not a registered person and who is outside New Zealand at the time the services are performed, and ▪ for goods that were charged with GST on importation. For this provision, for a non-resident company or unincorporated body, “outside New Zealand” includes a minor presence in New Zealand or a presence that is not effectively connected with the supply. In conjunction with s 5(20) and (21), s 11A(1)(ma) legislatively reverses the Court of Appeal’s judgment in Suzuki New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,096, and relieves the impost of GST on unregistered offshore suppliers arising from an inability to recover  GST on the cost of warranted repairs that had been included, directly or indirectly, in the purchase price of the goods. Services relating to offshore intellectual property rights — s 11A(1)(n), (o), (3), (4) Section 11A(1)(n) zero-rates services relating to the establishment and protection of intellectual property rights. Section 11A(1)(o) zerorates restraint of trade agreements that restrict the pursuing or exercising of intellectual property rights. The zero-rating applies to the extent that the rights are exercised outside New Zealand, or in the case of s 11A(1)(n) the services are supplied to a non-resident who is outside New Zealand when they are performed. A minor presence in New Zealand or a presence that is not effectively connected with the supply will not affect the “outside New Zealand” requirement for a non-resident company or unincorporated body. Offshore restraint of trade agreements — s 11A(1)(p) Agreeing not to carry on an activity outside New Zealand can be a zero-rated supply under this section, eg a New Zealand company makes a zero-rated supply when it agrees not to expand into Australia. Business-to-business supplies of financial services — s 11A(1) (q), (r), (6) Under s 11A(1)(q) and (r) business-to-business supplies of financial services may be zero-rated. See ¶32-310 and ¶32-320 for further discussion. Services connected with the Emissions Trading Scheme — s 11A(1)(s)–(w) Most transactions where the service is an emissions unit and the supply is the transfer or surrender of an emissions unit, or the services are a unit (other than an emissions unit) issued by reference to the sequestration, or avoidance of emission, of human-induced greenhouse gases and verified to an internationally recognised standard and the supply is a sale or disposal of that unit, will be zerorated.  Advertising space and advertising time supplied to nonresidents Binding public ruling BR Pub 03/03, “Advertising space and advertising time supplied to non-residents — GST treatment”, provides that the provision of advertising space in a publication or advertising time on radio or television to a non-resident who is outside New Zealand at the time the service is performed will be zero-rated, provided that all the other requirements of s 11A(1)(k) of the Act are satisfied. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 7. This ruling has been issued for an indefinite period. “Directly in connection with” Certain services must be supplied “directly in connection with” a particular commodity to be zero-rated. This applies to services relating to: ▪ offshore property (s 11A(1)(e)) ▪ offshore personal property (s 11A(1)(f)) ▪ goods in transit and temporary imports (s 11A(1)(h) and (i)) ▪ New Zealand personal property (s 11A(1)(l)) ▪ exported goods (s 11A(1)(m)), and ▪ tools for exported goods (s 11A(1)(maa)). In addition, s 11A(1)(k) specifically excludes services supplied “directly in connection with” New Zealand realty and personal property (other than choses in action). The meaning of “directly in connection with” has yet to be comprehensively defined by the courts. IR favours a narrow interpretation and considers that there must be a clear and direct relationship with the moveable personal property  before a supply will be zero-rated. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 7 and Case P78 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,523. The High Court considered the application of the phrase “directly in connection with” in Wilson & Horton Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,221 where it was held that the supply of advertising space in a newspaper was not a service provided directly in connection with the advertised goods. Rather, it was a service directly connected with advertising; the goods being at least one step removed from the services provided by the newspaper proprietor. Another example of how the phrase has been applied is provided by the High Court decision in Malololailai Interval Holidays New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,137. Marketing services supplied to the taxpayer (promoting the sale of time-share holidays at a resort in Fiji) were held not to be services supplied “directly in connection with land, or any improvement thereto, situated outside New Zealand”. Neazor J ruled that the sale contract between the taxpayer and the purchaser of the holiday would fall within that phrase, but the transaction between the marketing company and the taxpayer was one step removed from the direct transaction. Law: GST ss 5(20), (21), 11A  ¶32-035 Zero-rating of going concerns The supply of a taxable activity can be zero-rated as the supply of a going concern only if there is: ▪ a taxable supply to a registered person of the whole or part of a taxable activity that is a going concern (as defined) at the time of supply ▪ agreement by both parties to the transaction, recorded in a document, that the supply is one of a going concern, and ▪ a common intention between the parties that the supply is capable of being carried on as a going concern by the recipient.  To be a “going concern” there must be a supply of a taxable activity that the supplier carries on up to the time of transfer. All of the goods and services necessary for the continued operation of the taxable activity must also be supplied. See s 2(1). The provision clearly embraces six criteria: 1. There must be a taxable supply. 2. The recipient of the supply needs to be a registered person. 3. There must be the supply of the whole or part of a taxable activity. 4. The taxable activity must be a going concern (as legislatively defined) at the time of supply. 5. The supplier and recipient must agree that the supply is one of a going concern and record that agreement in a document. 6. The supplier and the recipient must intend that the supply is of a taxable activity (or part of a taxable activity) that is capable of being carried on as a going concern by the recipient. The overall emphasis is on the recipient’s ability to continue to operate a self-sufficient and stand-alone taxable activity previously operated by the supplier without having to acquire further commodities. See Cockburn v CS Development No 2 Ltd (2010) 24 NZTC 24,431 (CA) and Tepe Holdings Ltd v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-091 (CA). Inland Revenue (IR) has stated that “in most cases the agreement itself will provide evidence of an intention to transfer a going concern”. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 12, December 2000 at 25. It is also recommended that parties: ▪ record their intention in the agreement that the taxable activity be capable of being carried on as a going concern, and ▪ be able to point to evidence of that intention (such as the transfer of all of the things necessary for the seamless continuation of the  business). Timing of the test The GST Act requires the going concern test to be applied at the time of supply. The usual time of supply is when an invoice is issued by the supplier or when any payment is received by the supplier, whichever is earlier. See ss 9 and 11(1)(m). There had previously been some debate as to whether the going concern test should be applied at the time of supply or at the time of settlement of the transaction. However, the Court of Appeal in Cockburn v CS Development No 2 Ltd (2010) 24 NZTC 24,431 made it clear that the relevant time was the time of supply. The Supreme Court dismissed an application for leave to appeal the Court of Appeal’s decision, confirming that the GST time of supply was the appropriate time to apply the test, but also noting that it is still necessary to look forward to settlement date to determine what was actually being supplied. See Cockburn v CS Development No 2 Ltd (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-007 (SC). Rulings procedure While the term “going concern” is now defined, parties to a transaction may still require guidance on whether a supply is that of a going concern. A taxpayer can approach IR for a binding ruling either before or after the settlement of the transfer, whereupon IR will consider copies of the relevant documents and correspondence and will determine whether the supply constitutes that of a going concern. If IR decides that the supply will not be a going concern, the vendor will be assessed for GST and, where a tax invoice has been issued showing a zero rate, the vendor will be instructed to show the correct amount of tax. Procedures for seeking a private binding ruling are set out in ss 91EC and 91ED of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and require strict standards of disclosure. See ¶1-525. Rationale for the zero-rating provision Section 11(1)(m) was enacted to relieve a recipient of a going concern from having to fund the GST component on settlement and only receiving a refund from IR at a later date. Accordingly (Variety Leisure  Corporation v C of IR (1988) 10 NZTC 5,255 (HC) at 5,257 per Hardie Boys J): [the] provision is plainly intended for the benefit of the purchaser of a taxable activity. It … means that the purchaser does not have to find the money to pay the tax on settlement. Erroneously zero-rated transactions Where a transaction is treated by both parties as being zero-rated but that treatment is subsequently found to be incorrect, the supplier is generally liable to account to the Commissioner for the GST component of the supply. However, under s 78E, the supplier can increase the price by the rate of GST if the following five criteria are met: ▪ the supplier and the purchaser have agreed in writing that the supply of the property was the supply of a going concern ▪ the supplier has treated the supply as being chargeable with GST at the rate of 0% under the going concern provisions ▪ the agreement does not provide for an increase to the agreed price in the event that the supply is not a zero-rated supply ▪ the agreement does not otherwise contemplate or provide for the consequences if GST is not chargeable at 0%, and ▪ the supply does not come within the provisions of s 11(1)(m). Example: A vendor sells his tenanted commercial property for a price “inclusive of GST (if any)”. The parties agree in writing to zero-rate the supply as a going concern. IR subsequently assesses the vendor for GST output tax on the sale when it is discovered that the purchaser is not registered for GST. The vendor, utilising s 78E, attempts to recover that sum from the purchaser. The vendor does not qualify for relief under s 78E because the requirement that the agreement “does not otherwise contemplate or provide for the consequences if tax is not chargeable at the rate of zero percent” is not satisfied. By inserting “inclusive of GST (if any)” after the price, the parties had contemplated what was to happen if GST was assessed on the transaction.  See, for example, Capital Enterprises Ltd v Stewart (1998) 18 NZTC 13,870 (HC).  Even where the supplier cannot increase the purchase price, if the failure to correctly treat the supply as zero-rated was due to the default or deceit of the purchaser then the vendor can recover the subsequent GST liability as damages for breach of contract: see Starrenburg v Mortre Holdings Ltd (2004) 21 NZTC 18,696 (CA). For a discussion of the zero-rating of land transactions, see ¶32-505. Law: GST ss 2(1), 11(1)(m), 78E  GST EXEMPT SUPPLIES ¶32-040 Types of GST exempt supplies Both standard-rated and zero-rated supplies are termed “taxable supplies”. Pursuant to s 6(3)(d), an activity is excluded from the term “taxable activity” to the extent to which it involves the making of exempt supplies. Exempt supplies are expressly excluded from GST. The following are exempt: ▪ supplies of financial services and goods and services that are reasonably incidental and necessary to a supply of financial services (see ¶32-044) ▪ supplies made by a non-profit body of donated goods and services (see ¶32-048) ▪ residential accommodation supplied by letting or under a licence to occupy and the supply of leasehold land used for residential accommodation (see ¶32-052) ▪ the sale of a house, or the reversionary interest in fee simple estate of leasehold land, that has been used by the same person in the five years previous to the sale exclusively for the supply of residential accommodation (see ¶32-052)  ▪ supplies of fine metal (other than those that have been zero-rated) ▪ penalty or default interest imposed under a contract for the supply of goods and services or under an enactment ▪ a penalty imposed on unpaid rates, and ▪ a postponement fee for the payment of rates that relates to the financial costs of the local authority arising from the postponement — note that the administrative charge component of the postponement fee is subject to GST. Law: GST ss 8, 14  ¶32-044 GST exempt supplies: financial services Supplies of financial services, and the supply (by a financial services provider) of goods and services that are “reasonably incidental and necessary” to a supply of financial services, are exempt from GST. Section 3 lists the following activities as a financial service: ▪ the exchange of currency ▪ the issue, payment, collection or transfer of ownership of a cheque or letter of credit ▪ the issue, allotment, drawing, acceptance, endorsement or transfer of ownership of a debt security ▪ the issue, allotment or transfer of ownership of an equity security or a participatory security ▪ underwriting or sub-underwriting the issue of an equity security, debt security or participatory security ▪ the provision of credit under a credit contract ▪ the renewal or variation of a debt security, equity security, participatory security or credit contract  ▪ the provision, taking, variation or release of a guarantee, indemnity, security or bond in respect of the performance of obligations under a cheque, credit contract, equity security, debt security or participatory security or in respect of any of the activities listed above with the exception of currency exchange ▪ the provision, or transfer of ownership, of a life insurance contract or the provision of reinsurance in respect of any such contract ▪ the provision, or transfer of ownership, of an interest in a retirement scheme or the management of a retirement scheme ▪ the provision or assignment of a futures contract through a defined market or at arm’s length if the contract does not provide for the delivery of a commodity or the commodity itself is an exempt supply or the contract provides for a delivery of money ▪ the provision of a financial option and, from 30 March 2017, the transfer of ownership of a financial option ▪ the payment or collection of any amount of interest, principal, dividend or other amount whatever in respect of any debt security, equity security, participatory security, credit contract, contract of life insurance, retirement scheme or futures contract, or, from 30 March 2017, financial option ▪ agreeing to do, or arranging, any of the activities listed above other than advising on those activities ▪ the investment in an entity, if the investment is in an equity security equal to or greater than 10% of all equity securities issued by the entity or in a participatory security equal to or greater than 10% of all participatory securities issued by the entity, and the investment allows the investor, or a person acting on behalf of the investor, to influence the management of the business of the entity ▪ the evaluation by an investor of an investment referred to above in an entity and the planning or acting by the investor to influence  the management of an entity for the principal purpose of preserving or increasing the value of such an investment. The emphasis is on the “provision” of financial services. Related areas such as financial management may fall outside the term. The provider of the financial services must contract to supply the whole of an activity and not just part of it. This results from the statutory classification of certain “activities” as financial services with no provision being made for a part of an activity to constitute a financial service. Common transactions that come under one or more of the activities listed above include the buying and selling of company shares, and the sale of a life insurance policy. Debt collection services carried out by anyone other than the creditor are specifically excluded from the definition of financial services. See s 3(4)(b). The definition of “financial services” also does not include the assignment or transfer of a right to receive payment for a taxable supply where output tax would not be attributable to any taxable period for the assignment or transfer. For example, a trader who sells goods on credit might include the right to receive payment for such goods in the sale of the business as a going concern. Because no output tax would be attributable for the right to receive payment (the right being zero-rated), the sale of the right to receive payment would not be a financial service. General accounting and record package services The supply of general accounting and record package services to a supplier of financial services or to a customer of that supplier is subject to GST. Such supplies are specifically stated not to be supplies of financial services. This was legislated in response to the Court of Appeal decision in C of IR v Databank Systems Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,093 (which was later reversed by the Privy Council (1990) 12 NZTC 7,227). General accounting and record package services are defined to include each of:  ▪ the provision of any financial clearing system that may form part of a settlement process ▪ the posting of transactions to customers’ accounts ▪ the maintenance of those customers’ accounts (for instance, changes of address, preparation of account statements and credit limit compliance reviews) ▪ the provision of any ancillary services (such as network management, software support and development) to any of the above. Excluded are any of the above services that are supplied by a supplier of financial services and are reasonably incidental and necessary to the financial services supplier’s supply. Thus, these services, if supplied by a bank, would be exempt. For instance, a charge by a bank to a customer for processing a change to the amount of an automatic payment would not be subject to GST. Financial planning services An interpretation statement on the supply of financial planning services published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 7, July 2001 at 37 provides a summary of how the Commissioner views the GST treatment of various categories of financial planning fees: Fee category  Services subject to GST  Initial planning fees  Yes  Implementation fees  No  Administration fees  No  Monitoring fees  Yes  Evaluation fees  Yes  Re-planning fees  Yes  Switching fees  No  To determine the type of service a financial adviser is offering to investors, IR will examine the nature of the supply rather than the label given to the supply. If financial planners charge a global fee (which includes fees for more than one of the above categories), that fee must be apportioned between the categories to ensure the fees are correctly treated for GST purposes. Because financial services are treated as GST-exempt, financial institutions cannot generally claim GST input tax on the goods and services they buy. However, certain registered persons may elect to zero-rate the supply of financial services. If the election is made, GST input tax deductions may be claimed on the goods and services they buy. See ¶32-300–¶32-340. Law: GST ss 3, 14(1)(a), (1B)  ¶32-045 GST and capital raising costs Businesses are able to recover GST incurred on goods and services used to raise capital, to the extent that the capital funds their taxable activity. As introduced, the relevant legislation proposed to zero-rate the supplies. However, following submissions the proposed zerorating provision was replaced with a special deduction rule under ss 20(3)(hd) and 20H. The rule applies to GST-registered persons that principally make taxable supplies and that make exempt supplies of certain financial services in the course of a capital-raising exercise intended to fund their taxable activity. Such businesses can claim back the GST on these capital-raising costs when the existing rules under s 20(3) do not already allow a deduction. It is intended that the taxpayer should apportion their capital-raising costs according to the extent to which they ordinarily make taxable supplies. In other words, the apportionment should be based on the registered person’s usual ratio of taxable supplies as a proportion of their total supplies, excluding the supplies made for raising capital themselves. Example:  A Co. is a property developer and makes 80% taxable supplies and 20% exempt supplies. It issues a bond to raise capital to finance the purchase of land. In issuing the bond, it spends $11,500 in legal fees, including GST of $1,500. A Co. claims a deduction of $1,200 (80% of $1,500) based on A Co.’s usual ratio of taxable to exempt supplies (excluding the bond issue itself). Because the bond issue is a supply of an exempt financial service and not a zero-rated supply, A Co. is not required to include the amount of consideration for the supply in Boxes 5 and 6 of its GST return. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 77.  The rule applies to the following financial services: ▪ the issue or allotment of a debt, participatory or equity security ▪ the renewal of a debt, participatory or equity security ▪ the payment of an amount of interest, principal or dividend for a debt, participatory or equity security, and ▪ the provision or variation of a guarantee of the performance of obligations in the issue, allotment or renewal of a debt, participatory or equity security. The rule applies whether the capital raising is successful or not. It does not apply when the registered person has made an election to zero-rate business-to-business supplies of financial services, or an input tax deduction is otherwise available under s 20(3). The rule also does not apply to a non-resident registered under s 54B (although if a non-resident registered under s 54B makes supplies of financial services to other non-residents who are outside New Zealand at the time the services are performed, the non-resident can claim back its New Zealand GST costs of raising capital under existing s 20(3L)). Note that legislation enacted in 2019 made remedial amendments to the rules. In particular, the changes: ▪ clarified the relevant deduction available is of input tax on supplies of goods and services made to the registered person that are used for the capital-raising transaction  ▪ provided that a deduction is available for goods and services acquired by the registered person, to the extent that a deduction would be available under the ordinary rules, if the goods and services are used in the person’s usual business activity instead of being used in the capital-raising activity ▪ clarified that GST-registered persons are entitled to claim input tax deductions for capital-raising costs in situations where the funds raised are used to refinance a taxable activity of the registered person, and ▪ ensured that input tax deductions for capital-raising costs are also available in situations where the funds are ultimately used in a taxable activity by a different company in the same group of companies as the company that carried out the capital-raising transaction. The amendments retrospectively apply for supplies made on or after 1 April 2017, except for supplies for which a person has taken an inconsistent tax position before 26 June 2019 (the date of enactment of the amending Act). Law: GST ss 20(3)(hd), 20H  ¶32-048 GST exempt supplies: non-profit bodies and donated goods and services A supply by a non-profit body of any goods and services donated to it is exempt from GST. The exemption applies to donated services as well as donated goods. Example: Mr Burns decides to donate a block of land to the Springfield Church. Utilising the donated services of its parishioners, the church subdivides the land into sections and markets the properties as a new subdivision. All materials used in the subdivision have been donated by local business people. Sales of the sections will be exempt from GST.  In Case X19 (2006) 22 NZTC 12,255, the Taxation Review Authority held that a non-profit-making sports club was not liable for GST on the disposal of a car it had won as a “prize” from its bank. A non-profit body is an organisation that is carried on other than for the purpose of profit and that is prohibited from making any distribution to its proprietors, members or shareholders. The constitution and rules of an organisation would need to be examined to ascertain whether it falls within the classification. Many charities, associations and clubs may be non-profit bodies for the purposes of GST. As a result of the changes made to allow non-residents to register for GST, s 20(3K) applies only to a non-profit body that is resident in New Zealand. Note that 20(3K) previously allowed non-profit bodies to claim input tax deductions for most goods and services even if they did not directly relate to the making of taxable supplies. This provision was amended to ensure that GST-registered non-profit bodies cannot claim concessionary GST input tax credits on their acquisitions of goods and services without having to account for GST in respect of related disposals. Such disposals are effectively deemed to be part of the non-profit body’s taxable activity so that GST will apply at the standard rate or 0% if the supply is zero-rated. Section 20(3K) now provides that goods and services used by the non-profit body are treated as being used in the course or furtherance of the taxable activity of the non-profit body, unless they are used for making exempt supplies or the supplies are used solely in relation to an asset the non-profit body has made an election for under s 20(3KB). Thus, if an election is not made, when the non-profit body disposes of the asset it will be treated as disposing of the asset in the course or furtherance of its taxable activity and subject to GST. However, where an asset is used and supplies of goods or services are received by a non-profit body in relation to an activity that is not a taxable activity, the non-profit body may elect to exclude the asset from the operation of s 20(3K). The asset is treated as disposed of and reacquired on the election date. The output tax on the disposal is  limited by the amount of input tax on supplies that relate solely to the asset and are received by the non-profit body before the election. Section 88 provides for the valuation of supplies of assets used by registered non-profit bodies. Non-profit bodies are bound by a tax position concerning the output tax on the disposal of an asset if the tax position was taken in a return before 15 May 2018. An election is available for the value of a supply made during the period 15 May 2018 to 1 April 2021 as a consequence of the deregistration of the non-profit body. The amount of input tax is limited for a non-profit body, or associated person, if an asset formerly held by a non-profit body for which an election was made under s 20(3KB) or 88(4) is acquired from an unregistered person within five years of the supply of the asset by the original owner. Law: GST ss 2(1), 5(13AA), 5(24B), 14(1)(b), 20(3K), 20(3KB), 20(3KC), 88  ¶32-052 GST exempt supplies: residential accommodation The supply of accommodation in a “dwelling” is exempt but a supply of accommodation that is in a “commercial dwelling” is taxable for GST purposes. The main reason for the differentiation was to ensure that those in rental accommodation were not disadvantaged compared with owneroccupiers. Meaning of dwelling For accommodation to be in a “dwelling” the relevant premises must be occupied by the recipient as their principal place of residence or it must be reasonably foreseeable that this will be the case. The recipient must also be entitled to quiet enjoyment of the property. Accommodation supplied to boarders will also be treated as a supply of accommodation in a “dwelling”. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 44. The exemption for residential accommodation does not extend to homestays, farmstays, bed-and-breakfast establishments and  serviced apartments as these types of accommodation are included in the definition of “commercial dwelling” below: ▪ a hotel, motel, homestay, farmstay, bed-and-breakfast establishment, inn, hostel, or boardinghouse ▪ a serviced apartment managed or operated by a third party that provides services additional to accommodation and for which a resident does not have quiet enjoyment ▪ a convalescent home, nursing home, rest home, or hospice ▪ a camping ground, or ▪ any premises similar to the above. A supply of accommodation in an apartment that does not meet all of the criteria for being a serviced apartment (because, for example, it is managed directly by the owner) may still be a taxable supply if it does not meet the definition of “dwelling”. The supply would be subject to GST if it is made by the registered person in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. Supply of accommodation in a holiday home or bach A holiday home or bach let out for short stays does not appear to fall within the definition of “dwelling” as it is not the principal place of residence of the person renting the holiday home. Therefore, renting a holiday home may not be an exempt activity. The definition of “commercial dwelling” may encompass a bach if the accommodation includes services similar to those provided in a serviced apartment (eg cleaning, provision of fresh linen and rubbish removal). Where no additional services are provided then the position is less clear. The more conservative view is that there is probably not a supply of a “commercial dwelling” but neither is there a supply of a residential “dwelling”. Rather, there is a supply of accommodation that will be subject to GST. This position is based on the assumption that the guests stay in the property for short-term stays only and the letting of the property is carried out along commercial lines, ie the regular or continuous advertising and renting of the bach will constitute a taxable  activity. The owner of the bach will be required to register for GST if there are reasonable grounds for believing that the value of supplies in the course of renting the bach will exceed $60,000 in a 12-month period. A similar approach will apply to the supply of accommodation online through a website such as Airbnb. An Airbnb host may make available a whole house, or apartment, or may only rent out a room or rooms within their own home. The latter is similar to running a bed-andbreakfast establishment and is therefore likely to fall within the “commercial dwelling” definition. When considering whether a person breaches the threshold for GST registration, it is important to note the ownership structure of the property. If the person supplying the short-term accommodation is associated to the recipient, the value of the supply is the market value. The effect of this is that, in some circumstances, personal use of a holiday home should be included when calculating the gross income from rental activity. Example 1: Jo and Jenny are beneficiaries of their family trust. The trust owns an expensive holiday home with commanding views of the bay. When Jo and Jenny are not using the property themselves, the property is advertised on Airbnb for $420 per night (although this rate increases dramatically during peak holiday times). During the 2016–17 year, the house was used as follows: Short term stays  85 nights @ $420 per night  $35,700  Short term stays  28 nights @ $650 per night  $18,200  Total  $53,900  However, Jo and Jenny stayed 24 nights in the house as well. When Jo and Jenny’s personal use of the holiday home is taken into account, the GST registration threshold is breached. As beneficiaries, Jo and Jenny are associated to the trust and therefore are treated as paying a market rental for the 24 nights they stayed in the property. If they stayed at non-peak times, their rental for the property (24 × $420 = $10,080) pushes the trust over the registration threshold.  GST registration for this type of activity also has other consequences. The property itself will be subject to GST when it is eventually sold or there is a change in use. This is because the property is being used in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. Example 2: Anna and Max have a GST-registered partnership through which they operate their painting business. They reside in a large apartment in the city, which they own. Two years ago they started renting out two bedrooms to Airbnb guests, for which they have accounted for GST and claimed GST on a portion of the running expenses. In 2017 they sell the property for $1.4m to an unregistered purchaser. They must return GST on the sale, despite claiming no GST when they initially purchased the apartment. The apartment has been used in the course of furtherance of their taxable activity of providing short-term accommodation.  Note that, with effect from the 2013–14 income year, holiday homes that are partly used for taxable purposes, partly used for non-taxable purposes and unused for at least 62 days in the year, are mixed-use assets and subject to the mixed-use asset rules that provide for apportionment of input tax deductions: see further at ¶32-089. Inland Revenue statements Inland Revenue (IR) has released several items on the provision of short-stay accommodation by taxpayers, either in their own property or in a separate property. The items look at a variety of different scenarios in which accommodation is provided, including boarding services and properties advertised on Airbnb and Bookabach (see also ¶5-232, ¶5-695 and ¶10-113). QB 19/09, “Can I register for GST if I supply short-stay accommodation to guests in my home or holiday home?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 6, July 2019 at 27), considers whether hosts who provide short-stay accommodation in their home or property can register for GST. QB 19/09 confirms that the supply of short-stay accommodation (as defined in the item) is a taxable supply. Short-stay accommodation is defined in QB 19/09 as accommodation provided for up to four weeks in a dwelling that is not the guest’s principal place of residence and does not include accommodation provided to residential tenants,  boarders or care home residents. It also does not include student or emergency accommodation. Provided there is a taxable activity of continuously or regularly supplying (or intending to supply) short-stay accommodation, a person may voluntarily register for GST. If the supplies exceed $60,000, the person must register for GST. The item notes the on-going requirements if a person registers for GST and that when the property is sold or the activity ceases, it is likely there will be GST to pay. In June 2020, IR released an interpretation statement, IS 20/04, “Goods and services tax: GST treatment of short-stay accommodation”, which confirms the supply of short-stay accommodation will not be an exempt supply and then discusses the requirements for registration, the main consequences of registration and what happens when the property is sold or the short-stay accommodation activity ceases. IS 20/04 is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 69. Note that in August 2020, the Commissioner released a COVID-19 variation, COV 20/09, “Variation to sections 52(3) and 52(4) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 8, September 2020 at 22), which varies the requirements for cancellation of registration of a taxpayer providing taxable supplies of accommodation who changes to providing exempt supplies of accommodation, and therefore ceases carrying on a taxable activity, as a result of COVID-19. See ¶32-149. Leasehold land used for residential accommodation No GST is charged on the supply of bare leasehold land to the extent that it is used for residential rental accommodation erected on the land (s 14(1)(ca)). The Commissioner has issued public ruling BR Pub 08/01, “GST — when the supply of leasehold land is an exempt supply” in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 7, August 2008 at 13. The ruling clarifies that the exemption applies only to “ground leases”, ie where leasehold land is supplied separately from any buildings or improvements to the land. A grant or sale of the lease is specifically excluded under s 14(1)(ca). The ruling also outlines the Commissioner’s view on methods of apportionment. Apportionment is  required where parts of a leased property are used for a mixture of residential accommodation and other purposes. Leased property used for accommodation Section 14(1)(cb) specifically excludes from GST supplies of property by way of lease where the property is to be used for the principal purpose of residential accommodation by any person, ie not necessarily the recipient of the supply. The provision is designed to exempt certain supplies that would not be covered by s 14(1)(c). For example, where a company leases a commercial building and sublets the building to residential tenants, the head lease may not be caught by s 14(1)(c) because it is not, arguably, a supply of residential accommodation; rather, it is a supply of property that is to be used for accommodation. Sale of rented residential accommodation No GST is charged on the sale of a dwelling, or the sale of the reversionary interest in the fee simple estate of leasehold land, that has been owned by one person and used exclusively for letting for residential accommodation under a lease or a licence for at least five years immediately preceding the sale (s 14(1)(d)). This exemption would apply when a lessee of leasehold land purchased the land outright from the lessor. The exemption applies only to the sale (as opposed to the supply) of such dwellings. The gifting of such a dwelling would not, therefore, have exempt status. The exemption applies if the property has been used exclusively for residential letting for a five-year period. IR considers that it therefore does not apply if there is a mixed-used (taxable/exempt) purpose, such as when a property developer rents out a property pending its sale. The exemption also requires that only one person has owned the property for the five-year period. IR has issued an interpretation statement setting out general principles relating to the interpretation of s 14(1)(d). Interpretation statement IS 07/01 “GST treatment of sale of long-term residential rental properties” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 5, June 2007 at 16) concerns the following aspects of the interpretation of s 14(1)(d):  ▪ the requirement that the sale be made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity ▪ what constitutes exclusive use for residential rental purposes. For s 14(1)(d) to apply, IR considers that the following criteria must be satisfied: ▪ the supply must be by way of sale ▪ the supply must be by a registered person in the course or furtherance of any taxable activity ▪ the property must have been used for the purpose of supplying residential accommodation by way of hire, service occupancy agreement or licence ▪ the property must have been used exclusively for that purpose, and ▪ the vendor must have used the property for that purpose for a period of not less than five years up to the date of the sale. Note that with effect from 26 June 2019, the exemption in s 14(1)(d) has been amended so that it also exempts the sale of property used for five years or more for the making of supplies referred to in s 14(1) (cb), ie where the property has been sublet to tenants for five years or more. The provision previously required the landowner to have rented the dwelling to the ultimate tenant and did not apply to subletting arrangements where, for example, a GST-registered landowner had let the property to a housing provider who had sublet it to tenants for five years or more. Law: GST ss 2(1), 14(1)(c), (ca), (cb), (d)  SPECIAL CASES ¶32-053 GST and retirement villages  Interpretation statement IS 15/02, “Goods and Services Tax — GST and retirement villages” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 11, December 2015 at 6), addresses the GST treatment of supplies made and received by retirement villages and the GST treatment of land acquired for the development of retirement villages. The statement considers in some detail the nature of the supplies made by retirement villages, taking into account the common legal structures (including payment arrangements) used by retirement villages. It then considers whether those supplies are taxable or exempt supplies. The provision of financial services and the supply of accommodation in a dwelling will be exempt supplies. The statement considers the distinction between a “dwelling” and a “commercial dwelling” in the context of retirement village units and concludes that units whose residents are required to purchase care packages form part of a “commercial dwelling”. The supply of accommodation in such units is a taxable supply. Units whose residents are not required to purchase care packages and where the consideration is paid by the residents for the right to occupy the dwelling are “dwellings”. The supply of accommodation in those units is an exempt supply. The statement contains the following table summarising the GST treatment of supplies made by retirement villages to residents: Nature of Paragraph supply/payment reference  Dwellings (eg independent living villas)  Commercial dwellings (eg rest homes)  Dwellings (eg independent living villas)  Commercial dwellings (eg rest homes)  Entry payment [86] to [90] A payment made to become a resident  Most entry payments are not consideration for a GST supply made by a retirement village. Instead entry payments are usually money supplied under an interest-free loan or a refundable deposit  Most entry payments are not consideration for a GST supply made by a retirement village. Instead entry payments are usually money supplied under an interest-free loan or a refundable deposit  Facilities fees [91] to [93] or amenities contribution A payment for community facilities or management services, whether payable up front or accrued over a number of years  Exempt supply; Taxable supply; forms part of forms part of the supply of the taxable accommodation supply of in a dwelling accommodation in a commercial dwelling  Nature of Paragraph supply/payment reference  Nature of Paragraph supply/payment reference  Dwellings (eg independent living villas)  Commercial dwellings (eg rest homes)  Periodic fees [76] to [77], A payment for and [94] to [95] the proportionate share of village overheads  Exempt supply; Taxable supply; forms part of forms part of the supply of the taxable accommodation supply of in a dwelling accommodation in a commercial dwelling  Payment for [78] to [83] care services Payments for additional services such as laundry, cleaning, nursing and meals  Taxable supply; Taxable supply separate to the supply of accommodation in a dwelling  Payment for [80] to [83] ancillary and incidental services Payments for services that do not alter the character of the supply from being the supply of accommodation, eg transport services or an emergency response service  Exempt supply; Taxable supply; forms part of forms part of the supply of the taxable accommodation supply of in a dwelling accommodation in a commercial dwelling  Nature of Paragraph supply/payment reference Payment for domestic goods and services Domestic goods and services, as defined in s 2, supplied in relation to a commercial dwelling  [94] to [95]  Dwellings (eg independent living villas)  Commercial dwellings (eg rest homes)  Not applicable  Taxable supply; but value attributed to supply may be reduced under s 10(6)  Refurbishment [96] to [99] payment Payments made by residents for refurbishing their units on termination of occupation  Exempt supply; Taxable supply; forms part of forms part of the supply of the taxable accommodation supply of in a dwelling accommodation in a commercial dwelling  Right to use common areas and facilities  Exempt supply; Taxable supply; forms part of forms part of the supply of the taxable accommodation supply of in a dwelling accommodation in a commercial dwelling  [72] to [75]  Appurtenances forming part of dwelling, see [124] to [136]  The statement also considers claims for input tax deductions by retirement villages. Whether an input tax deduction can be claimed on goods and services acquired by a retirement village depends on the extent to which the goods or services are used for, or are available for use in, making taxable supplies. To determine the extent to which goods or services are used for making taxable supplies, a person must estimate at the time the goods or services are acquired how they intend to use them, choosing a determination method that provides a fair and reasonable result. An adjustment may be needed if the use of a good or service changes in an adjustment period from what was originally estimated when the good or service was acquired. The statement also considers the zero-rating of land acquired for the development of a retirement village under the zero-rating of land rules in s 11(1)(mb). It will be a zero-rated supply if the vendor is GSTregistered, the operator intends to use the land for making taxable supplies, and the land is not intended to be used as a principal place of residence of the operator or of a person associated with the operator. Retirement village operators will often acquire land with the intention of putting both commercial dwellings and dwellings on the land (ie for making both taxable and exempt supplies). A supply of land can be zero-rated even if the operator only plans to use the land partly for making taxable supplies. The phrase “for making taxable supplies” is not limited to situations where the operator intends to use the land solely for making taxable supplies. Previous position and transitional provisions For a discussion of the previous position and transitional provisions, see CCH, New Zealand Master Tax Guide 2017, ¶32-053. Law: GST ss 2(1), 11(1)(mb), 14(1)(c), 21HB(6), (7)  ¶32-054 GST and single supply versus multiple supplies When a supplier enters into a contract with a recipient to supply several goods and services in a single transaction, it is necessary to determine what sort of supply or supplies have been made to ensure that GST is correctly accounted for.  Where elements of what is being supplied are subject to GST at the standard rate, and other elements are zero-rated, exempt or not subject to GST at all, boundary issues will arise. Where multiple elements are supplied with potentially different GST treatments, a supplier must determine whether they have made a single composite supply (of all the elements) with a single GST treatment, or multiple separate supplies (of each element or a combination of elements) with different GST treatments. If the GST treatment of each element of the supply is the same, then this issue does not arise. Commissioner’s statement In September 2018, Inland Revenue (IR) released an interpretation statement, IS 18/04, “Goods and services tax — Single supply or multiple supplies” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 10, November 2018 at 5), which explains how to determine whether a supply with multiple elements is a single composite supply or multiple separate supplies. (Note that the interpretation statement was originally issued as IS 17/03 in April 2017 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 102), but was reissued as IS 18/04 because the Commissioner was aware some taxpayers had read example 4 of IS 17/03 as suggesting that a credit card surcharge would always be a separate exempt supply of financial services. This is not the Commissioner’s position and the statement was re-issued with an amended example 4 to clarify this. See also the discussion of credit card fees in QB 18/04 below.) The statement notes that sometimes the GST Act deems supplies of multiple elements to be treated in a particular manner (for example, s 5(14B), (15) and (20)). Where the GST Act does not deem a particular outcome, the arrangement actually entered into and carried out between the supplier and recipient must be carefully considered. The answers to the following questions may assist a registered person to decide whether they have made one composite supply or multiple separate supplies: ▪ What is the true and substantial nature of what is supplied to the recipient for their payment?  This requires a registered person to identify the true and substantial nature of what is supplied to the recipient. This is determined objectively and examines what is supplied from the recipient’s perspective. The fact elements could have been supplied separately to the recipient does not mean those elements should be severed from the rest of the supply. In addition, the fact a single price is charged to the recipient does not determine whether one or more than one supply is made. It is the actual supply made to the recipient that must be considered and not how the supply is invoiced or charged to the recipient. ▪ What are the relationships between the elements supplied? The courts consider whether one element of a transaction is merely ancillary or incidental to, or a necessary or integral part of, any other element of the transaction. The phrases “ancillary or incidental to” and “necessary or integral part of” are different descriptions of a similar test. The facts of each case will determine which description is more appropriate. Factors that indicate elements are ancillary or incidental to, or a necessary or integral part of, a dominant element include whether the element is: □ not an aim in itself; instead, the element facilitates, contributes to, or enables the supply of the dominant part, □ a means of better enjoying the main supply, □ an optional extra and is not in any real or substantial sense part of the consideration for which a payment is made. ▪ Is it reasonable or practical to sever the elements into separate supplies? Does a sufficient distinction exist between the different elements of a transaction to make it reasonable to sever them into separate supplies? This requires taking an overall view and looking for the essential purpose of the transaction and not artificially splitting what, from an economic point of view, is a single supply. If, on an  objective assessment, it is not reasonable to sever the different elements of the transaction, then there will be only one composite supply. If there is one composite supply, the zero-rating provisions may apply to zero-rate part or all of the supply. The compulsory zero-rating of land provisions may mean the supply is zero-rated if it includes land: s 11(1)(mb). Additionally, despite being a single composite supply, part of the supply may be required to be zero-rated: ss 11, 11A, 11AB or 11B. If the zero-rating provisions do not apply, the GST treatment will follow the dominant element of the supply. If there is no dominant element (for example, the supply is made up of several equally important elements that are integral to each other), the GST treatment will be determined by the overall characteristics of the single composite supply. If there are multiple supplies, the relevant provisions of the GST Act are applied to each supply. Where the recipient pays a global amount for multiple supplies with different GST treatments, the consideration is apportioned between taxable supplies and non-taxable or exempt supplies under s 10(18).  This process is summarised in the following flowchart:  Example 1: Services supplied to overseas students to help them to move to New Zealand Ecological Education Ltd offers education services to students in New Zealand. The education services are intended to provide students with a qualification in ecomanagement. Almost all of Ecological Education’s students are from overseas. To help students moving to New Zealand, Ecological Education provides various pre-arrival services to the students while they are still overseas (for example, interpreting and translating services, assistance with immigration procedures and the completion of enrolment applications). Ecological Education charges the student a single fee for the tuition costs and the pre-arrival services. Are the pre-arrival services separate zerorated supplies? No. The pre-arrival services are part of a single composite supply of standard-rated education services, so are also standard-rated. First, it is necessary to identify the supply by considering the true nature of the legal arrangements actually entered into and carried out by the supplier and the recipient in light of the surrounding circumstances. It is evident from the arrangement that Ecological Education supplies multiple elements, namely education services to the students in New Zealand, and various pre-arrival services to students while they are still overseas, all for a single fee. To decide whether Ecological Education has made one composite supply or multiple separate supplies it is helpful to consider the true and substantive nature of what is supplied to the student from the recipient’s (that is, the student’s) perspective. From the student’s point of view, the dominant supply is of education services. Considering the relationship between the elements supplied, the pre-arrival services are ancillary or incidental to the supply of education services. The pre-arrival services are not aims in themselves, but are a means of better enjoying the education services. Accordingly, there is a single composite supply of education services that is subject to GST at the standard rate.  Example 2: Tablet provided as part of mortgage promotion Andrew needs to obtain a mortgage of $250,000 to purchase land for the expansion of his manufacturing business. He approaches New Bank, because of its recent mortgage promotion. He gets his mortgage approved and, as part of the mortgage promotion, he receives a new tablet. If these were separate supplies, the mortgage would be an exempt supply of financial services under s 14(1)(a). The supply of the tablet would be a taxable supply under s 8. Is the supply of the tablet subject to GST? No. The tablet is an incidental part of a single composite, exempt supply of the mortgage, so is also exempt from GST. The true nature of the legal arrangement is a loan from New Bank to Andrew (secured by a mortgage over the land). The contract also includes a supply of goods from New Bank to Andrew. Therefore, New Bank supplies multiple elements to Andrew, namely a loan and a tablet. The question is whether these two elements are a single composite supply or multiple separate supplies. As with Example 1, the nature of the supply has to be considered from the recipient’s (that is, Andrew’s) perspective.  Unlike Example 1, the supply of the tablet cannot be considered ancillary to the supply of financial services, because it does not facilitate, contribute to or enable the supply of the dominant part of the transaction (the mortgage). The supply of the tablet does not directly affect the supply of the mortgage in any material sense. However, the supply of the tablet is incidental, minor or peripheral to the dominant element of the supply. Andrew would not have entered into a mortgage simply to receive the tablet. Obtaining the tablet is not an aim in itself. Andrew’s aim is to obtain a mortgage. Objectively, the supply of the tablet does not change or facilitate the dominant element, which is the mortgage. The supply of the tablet is also not sufficiently distinct from the supply of the mortgage to make it reasonable to sever and apportion the parts. It is the supply of the mortgage that triggers the supply of the tablet. In this situation, there is a single composite, exempt supply of a mortgage. The supply of the tablet is an incidental or peripheral supply to the dominant supply of GST-exempt financial services. This means all elements of the supply under the agreement are exempt for GST.  Example 3: Tablet available at reduced price as part of mortgage promotion As a variation to the facts of Example 2, Andrew still needs to obtain a mortgage to purchase land for the expansion of his manufacturing business. He approaches New Bank because of its recent mortgage promotion. New Bank’s mortgage promotion is that for new borrowings in the range of what Andrew wants to borrow, it is offering customers the opportunity to purchase for $500 a new tablet valued at $1,500. Andrew’s mortgage is approved, and as part of the mortgage promotion, he takes up the opportunity to get a new tablet for $500. Is the supply of the tablet subject to GST? Yes. The supply of the tablet is separate to the supply of the mortgage. Therefore, although the mortgage is exempt as the supply of financial services, the tablet is a taxable supply. Unlike Example 2, the tablet is not incidental to taking out the mortgage. Obtaining the tablet was an aim in itself. While Andrew’s primary aim was to obtain a mortgage, obtaining the new tablet was a separate objective. As in Example 2, the supply of the tablet does not change or facilitate the dominant element, which is the mortgage. However, in this case the supply of the tablet is sufficiently distinct from the supply of the mortgage to make it reasonable to sever and apportion the elements. The tablet was not part of the supply of the mortgage — it was separately pursued by Andrew for further consideration.  Question we’ve been asked — credit card fees In September 2018, Inland Revenue released QB 18/14, “GST treatment of fees that suppliers charge customers for using a credit or debit card” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 9, October 2018 at 58). The issue is whether the fee forms a part of the consideration for the goods or services being supplied (so a single composite supply of the goods or services and the payment facility) or whether the fee is a separate supply of a payment facility and therefore the item expands  on the analysis in IS 18/04. The item concludes that where suppliers charge their customers a fee for using a credit or debit card to purchase goods or services, that fee will form part of the consideration for the goods or services being supplied where: ▪ the supplier provides the payment facility directly to the customer ▪ the supplier arranges for an agent to supply the payment facility to the customer on the supplier’s behalf, or ▪ the supplier contracts with a third party to supply a payment facility to the customer. The fee will have the same GST treatment as those goods or services being supplied. If the goods or services are taxable, output tax must be returned on the amount of the fee. If it can be established that there is a separate supply of a payment facility to a customer by a third party, the GST treatment of that separate supply will not be determined by the GST treatment of the supply of goods or services by the supplier. It will be determined by considering the nature of what has actually been supplied. However, even if, after applying IS 18/04, the payment facility is considered to be a separate supply, the Commissioner’s view is that it will not be an exempt supply of a “financial service” if the payment facility only provides access to the payment network and facilitates the exchange of information between the card issuer, the acquiring bank and the supplier. In particular, the provision of such a payment facility does not amount to the “arranging” of “financial services” under s 3(1)(l), because whether the credit or debit card is charged, or settlement occurs, depends on the card issuer’s overriding decision. The payment facility provider’s role on these facts is limited to transmitting and recording the information that is relied on by the card issuer in making these decisions. The item also includes a number of examples. Interpretation statement The question of whether a supply is a single composite supply of multiple elements or separate supplies for GST purposes has also  been recently discussed in the context of supplies made by New Zealand hunting guides or outfitters and taxidermists to overseas hunters in interpretation statement, IS 20/02, “Goods and Services Tax – Supplies by New Zealand hunting outfitters and taxidermists to overseas hunters” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 28). In the Commissioner’s view, an outfitter makes: ▪ one composite GST supply to the hunter of a hunting experience in New Zealand, or ▪ two separate GST supplies where souvenir animal parts or hunting souvenirs are supplied by the outfitter, being: □ a single composite supply of a hunting experience in New Zealand, and □ the supply of souvenir animal parts or a hunting souvenir. The outfitter’s single composite supply of a New Zealand hunting experience to an overseas hunter will be a standard-rated supply. However, different GST treatments will apply to the supply of souvenir animal parts or hunting souvenirs depending on the circumstances and contractual arrangements between the parties, and the statement considers six scenarios involving supplies of these items for export. The statement is also accompanied by three fact sheets — one each for overseas hunters, outfitters and guides, and taxidermists — that briefly summarise the conclusions reached in the interpretation statement, setting out which supplies are standard-rated and which are zero-rated: ▪ IS 20/02 FS 1, “GST – Supplies by New Zealand hunting outfitters or guides to overseas hunters” ▪ IS 20/02 FS 2, “GST – Supplies by New Zealand taxidermists to overseas hunters and New Zealand outfitters”, and ▪ IS 20/02 FS 3, “GST – Overseas hunters in New Zealand for big game guided hunting”.  The interpretation statement includes discussion on valuing supplies and apportioning consideration where there is a mixture of standardrated and zero-rated supplies. The value attached to separate supplies should properly represent the consideration paid for those supplies, and the onus is on the outfitter to show that a supply has been valued appropriately. In the Commissioner’s view, part of the “trophy fee” charged by an outfitter is standard-rated and part is zero-rated. A Commissioner’s statement, CS 20/02, “Trophy hunting and the GST treatment of the ‘Trophy Fee’” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 107), has been released to assist outfitters in determining what portion of a “trophy fee” the Commissioner will accept as consideration for the standard-rated supply of the hunt and what portion is consideration for the exported supply of the souvenir animal parts or hunting souvenir. The Commissioner’s statement sets out some standard apportionment percentages for trophy hunting animals in New Zealand that outfitters may use, and those valuations will be accepted by the Commissioner. The use of these percentages is optional, but if an outfitter wishes to zero-rate a greater proportion of the trophy fee, they must be able to satisfy the Commissioner that their zero-rated portion is reasonable.  ¶32-056 GST and secondhand goods A registered person who purchases “secondhand goods” in the course of a taxable activity may be able to claim a GST secondhand goods credit. A credit can be claimed only if: ▪ the goods will be used for making taxable supplies ▪ the goods are in New Zealand ▪ the supply is a non-taxable supply (eg a supply made by an unregistered person or an exempt supply) ▪ the supply is by way of sale, and ▪ payment has been made during the relevant taxable period.  The secondhand goods credit is not available if the purchaser or another GST-registered person has previously claimed an input tax credit for Customs GST levied on the importation of goods. As a general rule the secondhand goods credit is 3/23 of the money consideration for the supply. Section 21B(5) provides that when a secondhand good is brought into a taxable activity, the input deduction available is limited to the tax fraction in place when the goods were acquired. Example 1: A GST-registered car dealer purchases a secondhand car from an unregistered person for $9,000 and subsequently sells it for $12,000 plus $1,800 GST. The dealer accounts to the Commissioner for the GST output tax of $1,800 and claims an input tax credit of $1,173.91.  Exclusive definition The definition of “secondhand goods” in s 2 is an exclusive one. It does not include livestock or, before 30 March 2017, secondhand goods consisting of or made from “fine metal” as that term is defined in the Act. With effect from 30 March 2017, the definition of “secondhand goods” was amended to allow a secondhand goods credit to be claimed for goods composed of gold, silver or platinum and of a kind manufactured for sale to the public. Deductions can be claimed for goods acquired in the four years preceding 30 March 2017, or in an earlier period when a claimed deduction was reassessed within that four-year period. This recognises that industry practice has been mixed and ensures that businesses that have claimed deductions are not subject to reassessments, but also that compliant businesses are not disadvantaged. “Secondhand” To be “secondhand”, the goods must have been used or treated or stored by a previous owner in such a manner that they could no longer be regarded as new. See Case N16 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,142. This approach was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in LR McLean  and Co Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,211. While the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 does not provide any guidance as to whether land can be classified as “secondhand goods” some court decisions have found that the purchase of land generated a secondhand goods credit: see ¶32-550 for further discussion. A forestry right also constitutes secondhand goods: refer to BR Pub 07/01 and ¶28-022. However, fishing quota, coastal permits and certificate of compliances do not constitute secondhand goods: refer to BR Pub 15/01 and BR Pub 15/02 and ¶27-371. Records Full particulars of the purchase must be kept if a secondhand goods credit is claimed (unless the consideration in money is $50 or less). Standard details to be noted include the name and address of the supplier/recipient, the date of the purchase, a description of the goods, the quantity or volume of the goods, and the consideration for the supply. Any supporting documentation (a receipt, for example) should also be retained, especially where a sizeable amount is involved. See ss 20(2)(c) and 24(7). Associated parties Where the supplier and recipient are associated persons the input tax credit available on purchases of secondhand goods is limited to the lesser of: ▪ the GST included in the original cost of the goods to the supplier ▪ 3/23 of the purchase price, or ▪ 3/23 of the open market value of the supply. See s 3A(3)(a). Example 2: A person has owned a 10-acre lifestyle block just outside the town boundary since 1980 (ie before the introduction of GST). That person (the owner) has never registered for GST. The property has recently been rezoned “residential” as a result of the expansion of the town boundary. The owner incorporates a special purpose development company, which purchases the property at its market value of $675,000. The  associated purchaser will subdivide the property into quarter-acre blocks and sell the sections. The company considers claiming a secondhand goods credit but, as the owner did not pay any GST on its original purchase of the land in 1980, the amount of the credit will be nil.  Section 3A(3B) limits input tax deductions for secondhand goods for land acquired as part of an arrangement involving more than two associated persons and more than one supply. If the provision applies, the amount of input tax for the supply is limited to the amount accounted for as output tax for all supplies that are part of the arrangement. Inland Revenue considered this section necessary to ensure that the zero-rating rules are not circumvented by arrangements involving secondhand goods deductions. “Associated persons” is defined in s 2A of the GST Act. Exported secondhand goods For the GST treatment of exported secondhand goods, see ¶32-032. The definition of “input tax” in s 3A(2)(b) ensures that a secondhand goods tax credit cannot be claimed where a non-resident supplies goods to a registered person in New Zealand and those goods have previously been supplied to another registered person who has entered them for home consumption under the Customs and Excise Act 2018 (whether the person was registered at the time they entered the goods for home consumption or later). Adjustments on changes to supply Section 25AB ensures that the rules dealing with changes in the consideration for a supply of secondhand goods apply correctly to input deductions claimed by a GST-registered purchaser of secondhand goods. The section applies to a supply of secondhand goods to a registered person when the GST-registered purchaser claimed a secondhand goods deduction, the amount of the claimed deduction exceeds the correct amount as a result of one of the events set out below, and the supplier does not provide a tax invoice or credit note in relation to the supply. The relevant events are: ▪ the supply has been cancelled  ▪ the nature of the supply has been fundamentally varied or altered ▪ the previously agreed price of the goods changes, whether through the offer of a discount or by other means, or ▪ the goods (or part of those goods) supplied have been returned to the supplier. If the section applies, the purchaser of the goods must return the excess amount of the deduction claimed as output tax for the taxable period in which the relevant event occurred. Law: GST ss 2(1), 2A, 3A, 20(2)(c), (3), 21B(5), 24(7), 25AB  ¶32-058 GST and trading trusts  In July 2018, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 18/02, “GST — GST treatment of distributions made by a trading trust to a beneficiary” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 8, September 2018 at 2), that considers the GST treatment of a distribution made by a GST-registered trading trust to a beneficiary, where that distribution consists of goods forming part of the trust’s taxable activity. In summary, the item provides: ▪ Where a GST-registered trading trust makes a distribution to a beneficiary for no consideration and that distribution consists of goods forming part of the trust’s taxable activity, it will be an associated supply for GST purposes. This is because the supply is between two associated persons — the trust and the beneficiary. ▪ The supply will likely be a taxable supply as it will be made in New Zealand in the course or furtherance of the GST-registered trading trust’s taxable activity. However, in certain circumstances the supply could be an exempt supply under s 14. ▪ The consideration for the supply is nil. This is because the beneficiary does not pay anything for this distribution of goods. However, GST is payable based on the value of a supply, not necessarily the consideration provided by the recipient. If the beneficiary uses the goods to make taxable supplies (or intends to), the value of the supply will be the consideration paid (ie nil). Otherwise, the value of the supply will be the open market value of the goods. ▪ The time of supply will vary depending on whether the goods vest in the beneficiary with an immediate right to present possession, or with a right to future possession. It also depends on whether the goods supplied can be removed or not. □ If the distribution vests property in the beneficiary with a right to present possession and the property is to be removed, then the time of supply will be at the time of the removal.  □ If the distribution vests property in the beneficiary with a right to present possession and the property is not to be removed, then the time of supply will be at the same time as the resolution to distribute is made. This is because the property will be immediately available to the beneficiary at that point. □ If the distribution vests property in the beneficiary with a right to future possession, the time of supply is at the time the beneficiary is permitted to remove the goods. It is unlikely that the beneficiary would be permitted to remove the property until the future date stipulated in the resolution to distribute. If the goods cannot be removed, the time of supply is the future date when those goods are made available. ▪ In all cases, it is irrelevant that legal title might not have been transferred to the beneficiary at the time of supply (ie on removal or when the goods are made available). ▪ If there is a delay in the transfer of goods from the trust to the beneficiary, the delay may create a bare trust relationship. This means the trustee will hold the goods as bare trustee. ▪ Distributions of goods to beneficiaries may trigger obligations on the trust to either register for or deregister from GST. However, distributions of all of the trust assets or distributions resulting in a substantial and permanent reduction in the size or scale of the trust’s taxable activity will not of themselves trigger a liability to register for GST. Distributions of all of the trust’s assets are likely to trigger a liability to deregister from GST though. Example: Distribution of goods by a trading trust to a beneficiary The Cheery Trading Trust is a GST-registered trust. It carries on a car rental business. The Cheery Trading Trust decides to make a distribution of a car to Benedict, a beneficiary of the Cherry Trading Trust. Benedict has just turned 20 and is about to start university.  The distribution of the car to Benedict will be a taxable supply for GST purposes. This is because the car is part of the Trust’s taxable activity. The consideration for the supply is nil. This is because Benedict is not paying anything for this distribution. Special value of supply rules apply to this transaction because the supply is an associated supply. As Benedict does not intend to use the goods to make taxable supplies, the value of the supply will be the open market value of the car (s 10(3)) and the Trust will need to account for output tax on this supply. If Benedict was registered for GST and intended to use the car in his business to make taxable supplies, the value of supply will be the consideration (ie, nil) (s 10(3A) and (3AB)). The Trust would therefore not need to account for any output tax on this supply. Similarly, Benedict could not claim any input tax on the car. Special time of supply rules apply to this transaction because the supply is an associated supply. As Benedict has been vested with an immediate right to present possession, the time of supply will be the time Benedict takes possession of the car (s 9(2)(a)). It is irrelevant that legal title in the car might not have been transferred to Benedict at the time of removal. If Benedict has been vested with a right to future possession (ie, when the rental car is returned in two weeks’ time), then that future date will be the time of supply.  ¶32-059 GST and agents Goods and services tax law distinguishes between supplies made by an agent (on behalf of a principal) and supplies made to an agent (on behalf of a principal). An “agent” is a person who is expressly or impliedly authorised to act for another party; see Case M40 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,247 at 2,253. Supplies made by an agent — s 60(1) As a general rule, supplies made by agents are deemed to be made by the principal and not the agent. For example, a company is deemed to make a supply if an independent contractor makes the supply on the company’s behalf. The company, and not the independent contractor, is then left with the GST consequences flowing from the making of that supply (accounting to the Commissioner for output tax on the sale, deducting input tax, etc). Separate GST considerations will arise for the supply made by the independent contractor to the company in acting as agent (ie the contractor must account to the Commissioner for GST charged on the service provided to the company and can be required to issue a tax invoice to the company).  Separate supplies — s 60(1B) Despite the general rule above, when an agent and principal agree that s 60(1B) applies to a supply of goods or services, the supply is treated as two separate supplies — namely a supply from the principal to the agent and a supply from the agent to the recipient. The agreement must be recorded in a document and it may relate either to a particular supply or for a type of supply. Section 60(1B) was inserted to overcome the situation where more than one tax invoice was being generated for a supply made by an agent for and on behalf of a principal. For example, an accounting system may automatically generate a tax invoice when a principal supplies goods or services to an agent and the agent may then issue a tax invoice when the goods or services are supplied to the recipient. This was a technical breach of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Section 60(1B) treats the supply as two separate supplies so that two invoices may be issued. The principal pays output tax on the supply to the agent, and the agent pays output tax on the supply to the recipient and claims input tax on the supply from the principal. The bad debt provision ensures the principal cannot claim a bad debt deduction if the agent has been paid for the supply of the goods and services to the recipient. Supplies made to an agent — s 60(2) Supplies made by a registered person to an agent are deemed to be received by the principal and not the agent. For example, the principal is deemed to receive a supply when an agent makes a taxable purchase of land. Here the principal, and not the agent, may deduct input tax. For example, funeral directors act as agents for their clients for GST purposes for goods or services acquired from third parties. Such transactions include advertising of funeral notices, flowers for funeral services, printing of orders of service, purchase of burial plots, and minister or organist services. The effect of s 60(2) is that the agent “drops out” of the transaction. For GST purposes the supply of goods or services by a third party to a funeral director as agent for a client  would be treated as a supply to the client and not to the funeral director. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 8, August 2001 at 9. The Commissioner has released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/03, “Goods and Services Tax — GST treatment of bare trusts” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 5, June 2016 at 16). The item considers whether it is the trustee or the beneficiary of a bare trust who makes supplies in respect of the trust property for GST purposes. The item explains that a bare trustee can be both a trustee and an agent for a beneficiary. Any supply a bare trustee makes or receives is treated as a supply the beneficiary makes or receives. Therefore, it is the beneficiary who makes the supplies, unless the trustee and the beneficiary agree otherwise under s 60(1B). This is because it is the beneficiary that carries on any taxable activity and may be registered or liable to be registered under s 51. Separate supplies — s 60(2B) A similar provision to s 60(1B) covers the situation when supplies are made to an agent. Section 60(2B) provides that when an agent and principal agree that the section applies to a supply of goods or services, the supply is treated as two separate supplies — namely a supply from the supplier to the agent and a supply from the agent to the principal. The agreement must be recorded in a document and it may relate either to a particular supply or for a type of supply. The agent cannot claim a bad debt deduction when they go unpaid by the principal: s 26(4). Supplies of distantly taxable goods or remote services — s 60(1A) and (1AB) New Zealand-resident agents acting for non-resident suppliers that supply distantly taxable goods or remote services to New Zealandresident consumers may agree with the supplier to treat the agent (and not the principal) as making the supply in the course and furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by them. See further at ¶32-064 and ¶32-067.  Separate supplies of distantly taxable goods or remote services — s 60(1C) When an underlying supplier makes supplies of distantly taxable goods or remote services through a marketplace, the underlying supplier and marketplace operator may treat the supply as two separate supplies — namely a supply of goods or services from the underlying supplier to the operator and a supply of those goods or services from the operator of the marketplace to the recipient. See further at ¶32-064 and ¶32-067. Documentation — s 60(3) An agent acting for a principal may issue or request to be issued with a tax invoice or credit or debit note as if the agent himself had made or received the taxable supply. (Where the agent issues such documents the principal may not also issue one.) The agent must then maintain sufficient records to enable the name, address and registration number (if any) of the principal to be ascertained. Supply to agent of non-resident principal — s 60(6) An agent may be treated as the principal when he or she receives a supply directly connected with (or with arranging) the importation or exportation of goods. This will be the case if: ▪ the agent is a registered person ▪ the supply received by the agent is made by a registered person ▪ the supply received by the agent is charged with the standard rate of GST ▪ the principal is neither resident in New Zealand nor a registered person, and ▪ the principal and agent agree that the agent is to be treated as the principal for GST purposes. Acceptance of this arrangement would enable the agent to deduct GST paid on inputs relevant to the importation or exportation of the  goods. See s 60(6). This concession is a limited one; for example, it does not enable a customs agent to claim customs GST on behalf of a non-resident who imports goods into New Zealand. This is because customs agents do not meet the requirement of “acquiring” the imported goods. Goods imported by agent treated as supply by agent — s 60(7) Goods that have been imported into New Zealand by a GSTregistered agent acting for an unregistered non-resident principal are treated as being a supply made by the agent if the principal and agent so agree. Liability of agent of absentee principal — s 59 Under 59(1) the term “absentee” is defined as meaning: ▪ any person (not being a company) who is out of the country for the time being ▪ any company incorporated offshore that does not have a fixed or permanent place in New Zealand (relating to the carrying on of any taxable activity in its own name), and ▪ any company incorporated offshore that is declared by the Commissioner to be an absentee. A person who carries on a taxable activity for and on behalf of an absentee principal is deemed to be an agent of the principal for the taxable activity. The agent is required to make returns and is liable for any tax charged or levied. ▸Note: Interpretation statement released In January 2021, the Commissioner released an interpretation statement, IS 21/01, “GST and agency”. The statement considers whether a person is acting as an agent or as a principal and is primarily concerned with the application of ss 60(1) and (2). The statement identifies a series of features that support the existence of an agency relationship for GST purposes. In the Commissioner’s opinion, authority and consent are essential features of agency and  there can be no agency relationship if they are not present. With respect to other features identified, the Commissioner considers that some strongly support an agency relationship, while others may support the existence of an agency depending on the circumstances. Aside from authority and consent, no one feature will be determinative, and each supply will need to be considered on its facts. Simply because a person has been appointed as an agent for a principal, it cannot be assumed they will always be acting in that capacity for all supplies made or received. The statement summarises the features that indicate an agency relationship as follows: “6. In summary, the Commissioner considers there are two essential features of an agency relationship: ▪ Authority: the agent must be authorised to act on behalf of the principal to create or affect the legal relations between the principal and a third party, for the relevant supply. ▪ Consent: the agent and the principal must both have consented to the conferral of such authority on the agent. 7. In determining whether authority and consent are established between the parties as principal and agent, the Commissioner considers the following features strongly indicate an agency relationship: ▪ Documentation: the documentation supports an agency relationship ▪ Payment of a commission: the agent receives a commission from the principal as remuneration for services. ▪ Ownership of property: the agent does not obtain a legal interest in any property it obtains as agent. ▪ Assumption of risk: the principal assumes the risk in a transaction.  ▪ Enforceability of contract: a contract made by the agent with a third party in the exercise of its authority is enforceable by and against the principal. ▪ Liability to pay debt: the agent is not liable to pay the debts of the principal. ▪ Reimbursement: the principal reimburses the agent for expenses. 8. The Commissioner considers the following features may, depending on the circumstances, support the existence of an agency relationship: ▪ Fiduciary obligations: fiduciary obligations may be owed by the agent to the principal. ▪ Tax: the parties account for tax in a way that is consistent with agency. ▪ Control: the principal has control over the agent. ▪ Use of property: the agent does not treat the principal’s goods as their own asset. ▪ Alteration of property: the agent does not alter or manipulate property obtained as agent. ▪ Sale price: the principal sets the sale price of goods. ▪ Notification of sale details: the agent is required to notify the principal of the price at which the goods were sold and the identity of the customer. ▪ Separate funds: the agent keeps the principal’s money separate from its own. ▪ Appearance: the agent holds itself out as an agent.”  In addition, the statement: ▪ distinguishes agency from other legal relationships ▪ discusses how the GST Act can operate to modify an agency relationship ▪ outlines the specific compliance obligations on agents and principals ▪ includes worked examples, and ▪ contains summaries of relevant agency cases. Law: GST ss 59, 60  ¶32-060 GST and nominees The rules applying to transactions involving nominees are intended to provide certainty by adopting an “economic substance” approach. Section 60B clarifies the GST treatment of transactions involving nominations when a contractual purchaser nominates another person (a nominee) to receive the goods or services from the contractual vendor. In these circumstances, the GST treatment will depend on which party provides payment for the supply of goods or services: s 60B(2)–(4). For transactions involving land, the supply will always be treated as being made by the supplier to the nominee: s 60B(6). Section 60B applies when person A enters into a contract to supply goods and services to person B and person B directs person A to provide the goods and services to (a nominated) person C who is not party to the contract. The section does not apply to situations involving supplies made to or by agents, as these situations are governed by s 60. See ¶32-059. Also, the rule does not apply to assignments or novations. The nomination rules in s 60B affect the tax invoice requirements. In transactions involving nominations, a nominee may not have a tax  invoice as it may have been issued to the purchaser. In these circumstances, s 24(7B) requires a nominee to maintain records that would allow the name and address of the supplier, the date of payment for the supply, a description of the goods and services supplied, and the consideration for the supply to be ascertained. Section 20(2)(e) states that a nominee may use the records required under s 24(7B) for claiming an input tax deduction. Law: GST ss 20(2)(e), 24(7B), 60B  ¶32-061 GST and directors’ fees A “taxable activity” is defined in s 6 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. See ¶32-024. Excluded from the definition are the activities of a person in relation to any engagement, occupation or employment under any contract of service or as a director of a company, see s 6(3)(b). However, the exclusion does not apply to a person who accepts any office in carrying on any taxable activity. In this case, the services supplied as the holder of that office are deemed to be supplied in the course or furtherance of that taxable activity. Therefore, if a GST-registered sole trader, in carrying on his or her taxable activity, accepts a company directorship, s 6(5) applies and GST is chargeable on the director’s fees paid. In addition, s 6(4) provides that if an employee is engaged by a third party to be a director or other person referred to in s 6(3)(c)(iii) (eg chairman or member of any local authority, statutory board, council, committee or other body) and the employee is required to account to their employer for any payment received, the payment will be treated as consideration for a supply of services by the employer to the third party. The employer will therefore account for GST and the third party will be able to claim an input tax deduction. Public binding ruling BR Pub 15/10 sets out whether a director’s fees are subject to GST. The ruling applies for an indefinite period from 30 June 2014 and is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 7, August 2015 at 3.  Essentially, BR Pub 15/10 provides that if a registered person accepts an office as a director in carrying on a taxable activity, the fees that person receives for providing their services will be subject to GST. The ruling contains the following flow diagram that illustrates the GST treatment of directors’ fees from a director’s perspective: Does a director need to return GST on their fees?  1  Where the director is contracted through a third party, the third party may need to return GST on the fees they receive for providing the services of the director to the company. See paras 29–32 of the Commentary. 2  The employer may be required to return GST on the directors’ fees where the director must account for their fees to their employer. See paras 33–37 of the Commentary. 3  The partnership may be required to return GST on the directors’ fees in this situation. See paras 38–42 of the Commentary.  See the full text of the ruling for examples of the different scenarios. Law: GST s 6(3)(b), (4), (5)  ¶32-063 GST and entertainment expenditure A taxpayer is limited to claiming an income tax deduction of only 50% of certain entertainment expenditure. See subpart DD of the Income Tax Act 2007. Section 21I(4) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 provides for the GST implications of the disallowed (50%) component of the expenditure. Under s 21I(4), the taxpayer is deemed to make a supply of the disallowed component. As discussed below, this usually requires the taxpayer to account for output tax on the deemed supply. The following rules apply: ▪ The supply of the 50% disallowed expenditure is deemed to take place only if the entertainment expenditure is incurred “in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity”. ▪ Expenditure does not include the payment to an employee of an entertainment allowance or a reimbursement payment that is exempt income under s CW 17, CW 17B, CW 17C or CW 18 of the Income Tax Act. Again, there is no output tax impost here: s 21I(5).  ▪ The supply is deemed to occur at the earlier of the date on which the income tax return is due or is filed. The liability to account for output tax arises at that time. The adjustment is made in the GST return for the period covering the earlier of: □ the date on which the tax return for the relevant tax year is filed, or □ the date by which the tax return for the relevant tax year must be filed under an extension of time arrangement, ie 31 March of the following tax year for taxpayers registered with a tax agent. ▪ The output tax impost is 3/23 of expenditure disallowed for income tax purposes. The GST adjustment does not give rise to an income tax deduction. Refer to s DB 2(3) of the Income Tax Act and ¶10-497. Law: GST s 21I(4), (5)  ¶32-064 GST and imported goods Levied by Customs GST is levied by the New Zealand Customs Service on goods entered or delivered for importation, or those that are imported illegally. While the tax is imposed irrespective of whether the importer is a registered person, it is not imposed on goods below the normal Customs level. Before 1 December, this was set at $399, ie $60 worth of GST and duty combined. The $60 rate (known as the “de minimis” threshold) was effective from 1 October 2010 and was designed to offset the increase in GST to 15% from the same date. From 1 December 2019, goods that have a Customs value of $1,000 or less will not have the tax levied by Customs. This brings the Customs provisions in line with the newly introduced rules for lowvalue imported goods (discussed below). The de minimis threshold does not apply to shipments of alcohol or tobacco products. See reg 70 of the Customs and Excise Regulations 1996.  Goods and services tax is calculated on the total of: ▪ the value of the goods under sch 4 of the Customs and Excise Act 2018 ▪ the amount of duty and tax (other than GST) payable under the Customs and Excise Act ▪ insurance and freight costs incurred in bringing the goods to New Zealand (if not already included above), and ▪ the amount of levy paid or payable on goods under the Climate Change Response Act 2002 (for goods that contain a specified synthetic greenhouse gas). In Adidas New Zealand Ltd v Collector of Customs (Northern Region) (1999) 1 NZCC ¶55-001 (CA) the Court held that royalties paid by the importer to its parent company formed part of the Customs value of the goods. This decision was applied in Collector of Customs v Avon Cosmetics Ltd (2000) 1 NZCC ¶55-014 (CA). Schedule 4 of the Customs and Excise Act 2018 sets out a number of items that form part of the customs value of imported goods, including royalty and licence fees, commissions, brokers’ fees and packing costs. Input tax for customs GST can only be claimed by a GST-registered person who is the importer and who acquires the goods for making taxable supplies. Low-value imported goods from 1 December 2019 In October 2018, the government announced proposed new rules for GST on low-value imported goods. These rules were included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2019–20, GST Offshore Supplier Registration, and Remedial Matters) Act 2019, which was enacted on 26 June 2019. In summary, offshore suppliers are required to register, collect and return GST on goods valued at or below $1,000 supplied to consumers in New Zealand. The rules apply when the good is outside New Zealand at the time of supply and is delivered to a New Zealand address. Offshore suppliers are required to register when  their total taxable supplies exceed the $60,000 threshold. Marketplaces and re-deliverers may also be required to register in certain circumstances. Offshore suppliers are not required to return GST on supplies to New Zealand GST-registered businesses or to provide tax invoices. Tariffs and border cost recovery charges have been removed from imported consignments valued at or below $1,000. The current processes for collecting GST and other duty at the border by Customs continue to apply for consignments valued over $1,000. However, processes have been put in place so Customs does not collect GST on goods in a consignment over $1,000 if GST was already collected by the supplier. The new rules apply to supplies made on or after 1 December 2019, subject to a transitional provision for supplies made under certain fixed-term contracts, paid for periodically, entered into before 1 December 2019 (see below). Details of the rules are discussed below. Change to the place of supply rules Changes to s 8(3) provide that distantly taxable goods supplied by a non-resident supplier are treated as being supplied in New Zealand and are therefore subject to GST. However, supplies of distantly taxable goods by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand GST-registered recipients for their taxable activity are treated as being supplied outside New Zealand and therefore not subject to GST: s 8(4E). This is unless the non-resident supplier chooses otherwise for the supply of the goods and: ▪ at the time of the election, the non-resident supplier reasonably expects that more than 50% of the value of the supplies made by them to persons in New Zealand during the next 12 months will be to unregistered persons, and ▪ the value of the supply is not more than $1,000: s 8(4F).  Where the supplier chooses to treat the supply as made in New Zealand, the non-resident supplier will be able to claim back any New Zealand GST costs incurred in making the supplies under the special input tax deduction rules in s 20(3L) (see ¶32-022). Determining if recipient is registered To determine if GST is payable, non-resident suppliers may be required to identify whether a New Zealand recipient of the supply is GST-registered. The rules for identifying GST-registered recipients of remote services also apply for identifying a GST-registered recipient of distantly taxable goods (see ¶32-067). Under these rules, the supplier is required to treat the recipient as not being a registered person unless the recipient: ▪ notifies the supplier that they are a registered person, or ▪ provides the supplier with their GST registration number or New Zealand business number. GST-registered recipients of distantly taxable goods should not identify themselves as a GST-registered person or provide their GST registration number, or a New Zealand business number, if they intend to use the goods for 100% non-taxable purposes. As with the rules for remote services, the Commissioner is also able to prescribe or agree with a supplier on the use of another method to determine whether the supply is made to a registered person for the purpose of carrying on the registered person’s taxable activity. GST registration threshold Non-resident suppliers of distantly taxable goods to New Zealand customers are required to register and charge GST if their total value of supplies made to New Zealand consumers exceeds $60,000 in a 12-month period. Non-resident suppliers can use a fair and reasonable method of converting foreign currency amounts to New Zealand dollars to determine whether the registration threshold has been exceeded. As distantly taxable goods supplied by a nonresident to New Zealand GST-registered businesses are generally treated as not being supplied in New Zealand (and therefore not  subject to GST), these supplies do not count towards the registration threshold. However, if the supplier decides that these supplies are made in New Zealand, these supplies will count towards the threshold. Distantly taxable goods Thus, supplies of distantly taxable goods to New Zealand unregistered consumers by GST-registered non-resident suppliers are subject to GST. “Distantly taxable goods” are defined as items of goods that: ▪ are moveable personal property (other than choses in action) ▪ are not alcoholic beverages or tobacco or tobacco products ▪ are supplied by: □ a non-resident, and the goods are outside New Zealand at the time of supply, or □ the operator of a marketplace, and the underlying supplier is a non-resident, or □ a redeliverer (see below) ▪ are delivered at a place in New Zealand and the supplier or an underlying supplier makes, or arranges, or assists, the delivery, and ▪ each have an estimated customs value less than the $1,000 entry value threshold (see below), or the supplier has an effective election in place in relation to goods valued over the threshold (see below). If distantly taxable goods are part of a supply that also includes other goods, the distantly taxable goods are treated as a separate supply from the other goods.  For example, in some cases, a single transaction will involve one or more goods that each have an estimated customs value of $1,000 or less (low-value goods) and, at the same time, one or more other goods that each have an estimated customs value exceeding $1,000 (high-value goods). If the supplier has not made an election to treat high-value goods as distantly taxable goods, s 4B(2) splits such transactions into two separate supplies: ▪ a supply of distantly taxable goods, consisting of all the low-value goods, except for alcoholic beverages, tobacco and tobacco products, and ▪ a second supply consisting of the remaining goods supplied in the transaction. However, if the supplier has elected to treat its supplies of high-value goods as distantly taxable goods, the provision only applies to split a single supply of goods into two separate supplies if some of the goods supplied do not meet the definition of “distantly taxable goods” because they are in New Zealand at the time of supply, or because they are alcoholic beverages, tobacco or tobacco products. The government has indicated that it will review the entry value threshold of $1,000 three years after the implementation date of 1 December 2019. Consideration for the supply The value of a supply of distantly taxable goods for determining the amount of GST payable is generally determined under ss 10(2) and 10(7E). Under s 10(2)(a), the value of a supply of distantly taxable goods (with the addition of GST) is generally the amount of consideration in money for the supply. Section 10(7E) also ensures the amount of consideration for a supply of distantly taxable goods that is included in a supply of services includes the consideration for services (the related services) that relate to the distantly taxable goods (such as delivery and associated insurance) if:  ▪ the consideration for the supply of the related services is determined by reference to the items included in the supply of distantly taxable goods ▪ the supplier or underlying supplier of the distantly taxable goods makes, arranges or facilitates the supply of services ▪ the supply of related services is directly in connection with the distantly taxable goods or is of insurance of the goods ▪ the supply of related services would otherwise be zero-rated, and ▪ the supply of related services and the supply of distantly taxable goods do not form a single supply. This ensures that where there is a separate zero-rated supply of services that would generally form part of the supply of the distantly taxable goods because they were ancillary, integral or incidental to the supply of the goods, the consideration for the separate supply of those services is also included. Example 1: application of s 10(7E) to separate zero-rated supply of international transport Jan, a consumer in New Zealand, purchases a fishing rod from an American merchant on the A Co. marketplace for NZ$20 (excluding GST). The merchant does not provide shipping to addresses outside the United States. However, to make goods on its marketplace available to a global market, A Co. allows customers outside the United States to purchase shipping to the destination country from a freight forwarder. Using the A Co. marketplace, Jan purchases shipping of the fishing rod to her home in New Zealand for NZ$10 excluding GST. Under the rules applying to electronic marketplaces, A Co. is treated as making the supply of the fishing rod to Jan, meaning that A Co. is responsible for GST on the supply of the fishing rod. However, neither A Co. nor the American merchant supply the shipping to Jan, as the contract for the supply is between the freight forwarder and Jan. This means that the supply of shipping is separate to the supply of the fishing rod. Consequently, the supply of shipping is zero-rated under the rules applying to international transportation. However, s 10(7E) treats the shipping fee as part of the consideration for a taxable supply of distantly taxable goods because: ▪ the shipping fee is determined by reference to the supply of the fishing rod to Jan  ▪ the shipping was purchased by Jan through the A Co. marketplace, which is sufficient to meet the test that either A Co. or the American merchant facilitated the supply of the shipping ▪ the shipping is supplied directly in connection with distantly taxable goods, as it involves the physical handling and transport of the fishing rod ▪ in the absence of s 10(7E), the shipping would be zero-rated as a supply of international transportation services, and ▪ the supply of shipping and the supply of distantly taxable goods do not form a single supply (as mentioned above, the supply of shipping is a separate supply to the supply of the fishing rod). This means that A Co. is required to return GST of NZ$4.50, made up of NZ$3 in GST on the fishing rod (NZ$20 × 15% = NZ$3) and NZ$1.50 in GST on the shipping (NZ$10 × 15% = NZ$1.50). Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 13  Estimated customs value The entry value threshold is defined as $1,000. To fall within the definition of “distantly taxable goods”, the estimated customs value of the goods must be below this threshold. The estimated customs value of an item of goods is determined under s 10B as the consideration for the item (as discussed above) reduced by the total amount included in that consideration for: ▪ the cost of transport and insurance charges— □ for goods that are imported into New Zealand, for the period from when the item leaves the country from which it is supplied to when it is delivered in New Zealand □ for goods that are already in New Zealand, for the period from when the item leaves its place of origin to when it is delivered in New Zealand ▪ the amount of GST that would be charged under s 8 if the supplier was a resident, and ▪ duty payable under the Customs and Excise Act 2018.  Note that a supplier can use a reasonable estimate of these costs based on the information available to them at the time of supply. Options to charge GST on certain supplies of high-value goods Suppliers (including redeliverers and operators of marketplaces) can treat their high-value goods (other than alcohol and tobacco) as distantly taxable goods, and therefore charge GST at the rate of 15% on their supply, if they have an effective election in place and the goods are delivered to a place in New Zealand. The election is available to suppliers satisfying a self-assessed 75% test or those for whom the Commissioner exercises her discretion. Self-assessed 75% test Under the self-assessed test, suppliers of distantly taxable goods may elect to treat imported goods (other than tobacco and alcohol) valued above $1,000 as distantly taxable goods if the electing supplier considers that at least 75% of the total value of distantly taxable goods that will be supplied to New Zealand consumers in the 12 months from the first day of the taxable period beginning after the election will consist of goods that are individually valued at $1,000 or less. The election will continue to be effective for subsequent taxable periods beginning before the election is cancelled. Note that for the period from 1 December 2019 to 22 March 2020, the wording of the legislation required “reasonable grounds for believing” the 75% test would be satisfied. However, to clarify that the test is a self-assessed test, those words were replaced with “the electing supplier considers” with effect from 23 March 2020. Example 2: merchant making election under self-assessed 75 percent test Big Ben’s Bikes, an online British bike, bike parts and bike accessories store, sells and ships goods from its warehouse in London to customers around the world. Big Ben’s Bikes wishes to treat its high value goods supplied to New Zealand consumers as distantly taxable from the start of their first taxable period, being 1 December 2019. Big Ben’s Bikes sold £78,000 worth of low-value imported goods to customers in New Zealand in the year 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019. Big Ben’s Bikes also sold £22,000 worth of high-value imported goods to New Zealand customers in that year. Therefore, 78 percent of the total value of goods that Big Ben’s Bikes sold to customers in New Zealand that year consisted of goods individually valued at or  below NZ$1,000. This percentage is typical of Big Ben’s Bikes’ annual sales to New Zealand customers (in previous years, Big Ben’s Bikes’ sales of goods valued at or below NZ$1,000 as a proportion of its total sales to New Zealand customers have been within the range of 76 percent to 80 percent). Based on this historical information and without any information to suggest that this percentage is likely to be less than 75 percent for the 12-month period beginning 1 December 2019, it is reasonable to assume that Big Ben’s Bikes meets the 75 percent test. On this basis, Big Ben’s Bikes self-assesses that it is eligible to make the election and notifies Inland Revenue that they will be charging GST on supplies of high-value goods under the self-assessed test. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 48  Commissioner’s discretion Alternatively, if a supplier makes an election but does not satisfy the 75% test, they may still charge GST on their supplies of high-value goods to consumers if the Commissioner considers that giving effect to the election will not result in a risk to the integrity of the tax system. When deciding whether to exercise her discretion, the Commissioner will take the following factors into account: ▪ whether the electing supplier and any associated persons have a good history of previous compliance with New Zealand tax legislation and the tax laws of countries and territories outside New Zealand ▪ the total value of high-value goods supplied by the electing supplier to New Zealand consumers, and ▪ any other factors the Commissioner considers relevant. Cancellation of election If an electing supplier requests the election be cancelled, the Commissioner may cancel the election by notifying the supplier of the date on which the election ends. In the situation where the Commissioner unilaterally decides to cancel an election by a supplier (in cases of non-compliance by the supplier), the Commissioner will:  ▪ notify the electing supplier of the date of the proposed cancellation and the reasons for the proposed cancellation ▪ consider any arguments against the proposed cancellation provided by the electing supplier within 30 days from the date of notification, or within a shorter or longer period if the Commissioner considers that period is appropriate in the circumstances, and ▪ notify the supplier of the date on which the election is cancelled. Tax invoices A non-resident supplier is not required to provide a tax invoice in relation to supplies of distantly taxable goods (although note the requirement to provide a receipt — see below). However, a nonresident supplier may choose to provide a full tax invoice if: ▪ the goods were incorrectly treated as being supplied in New Zealand instead of outside New Zealand (under s 8(4E)) and therefore GST was charged ▪ the value of the supply (being a GST-exclusive concept) is $1,000 or less, and ▪ the recipient either notifies the supplier that they are a registered person or provides their registration number or New Zealand business number: s 24(5B). This allows the recipient to claim a deduction rather than the nonresident supplier having to refund the GST charged. In addition, if the non-resident supplier chooses to treat the supply of distantly taxable goods to a registered recipient as a supply made in New Zealand under s 8(4F) (see above), the non-resident will then be required to provide a tax invoice: s 24(5BB). Input tax deductions A recipient is not able to claim an input tax deduction for a supply of distantly taxable goods unless the recipient has obtained a tax  invoice under either s 24(5B) or (5BB) (see above). However, the recipient will not be denied an input tax deduction when the supply is treated as being made in New Zealand by the recipient of the supply if the recipient has accounted for the output tax charged on the supply. Incorrect GST treatment When a GST-registered recipient is incorrectly charged GST, a nonresident supplier may make an output tax adjustment in the return when it is apparent that a mistake has been made. This applies when: ▪ the supply was standard-rated when it should not have been treated as a taxable supply and no election to provide a tax invoice was made under s 24(5B) (s 25(1)(aab)), or ▪ the supply is treated as being a supply of distantly taxable goods made in New Zealand and charged with tax and— □ the supplier receives a declaration from the recipient, or other confirmation, that the tax charged under s 12 on the importation of the goods into New Zealand was paid when the goods were imported, and □ the supplier reimburses the recipient for the amount of tax included in the consideration for the supply (s 25(1)(bb)). As stated above, a non-resident supplier has the option to issue a tax invoice under s 24(5B) when the recipient has been incorrectly charged GST, but only when the value of the supply is $1,000 or less. When a supply of distantly taxable goods is incorrectly taxed, and the supplier opts to issue an invoice, the invoice must contain all the details in s 24(3). The provision of a tax invoice allows the GSTregistered recipient to claim the incorrectly charged GST to the extent to which the recipient uses the goods, or the goods are available for use, in making taxable supplies.  When a non-resident supplier opts to provide a tax invoice: ▪ the supplier must not make an adjustment under s 25 to correct the amount of GST shown on the invoice, and ▪ the supplier and recipient will be deemed to have agreed that the supply is made in New Zealand and so is subject to GST. The following flow diagram illustrates how the above rules apply:  Reverse charge for GST-registered recipients An amendment to the existing reverse charge under s 8(4B) (see ¶32-400) requires GST-registered recipients of supplies of distantly taxable goods (that are treated by s 8(4E) as not being supplies in New Zealand) to return output tax on the supply if the percentage intended or actual use of the goods is less than 95% of the total use. The amendment also extends the reverse charge to business-tobusiness supplies of goods that are in New Zealand at the time of supply (that are treated by s 8(4) as not being supplies in New Zealand). Following the initial enactment of the provisions, it was retrospectively clarified that the reverse charge only applies when the goods are imported by the recipient in a consignment with a total value of $1,000 or less and the recipient does not pay GST to Customs or the supplier of the goods. An optional savings provision exists for taxpayers who took an inconsistent tax position in the period from 1 December 2019 to 22 March 2020. An exception to the prohibition on input tax deductions in s 20(4C) allows a recipient of distantly taxable goods, required to return output tax under the reverse charge, to make an input tax deduction to the extent the goods are used for, or available for use in, making taxable supplies: s 20(4D). Example 3: reverse charge Melissa is a self-employed project manager who is registered for GST. She purchases a phone from a non-resident supplier for NZ$400. At the time of purchase, she  identifies herself as a GST-registered person and therefore is not charged GST. She uses the phone 50% for her taxable project management services and 50% for private use. Under the reverse charge, Melissa is treated as making a taxable supply to herself of NZ$400 at the 15% rate. She must return output tax of NZ$60 (NZ$400 × 15%). However, Melissa can claim an input tax deduction for the portion of her total use of the phone that is for taxable purposes (50%). The amount of the input tax deduction is NZ$30 (NZ$60 of GST × 50%). Her net position in the relevant return (assuming no other supplies) is therefore an output tax liability of NZ$30 (NZ$60 output tax minus NZ$30 input tax). If Melissa’s taxable use of the phone had been 95% or more, she would not have been required to apply the reverse charge. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 42– 43  Reverse charge applied and GST also incorrectly charged There may be instances when a GST-registered recipient applies the reverse charge and the non-resident supplier also incorrectly charges the recipient GST. In this situation, GST would be returned twice on a single supply (by the non-resident supplier and the GSTregistered recipient). This issue will likely be resolved if the nonresident supplier subsequently refunds the GST charged to the GSTregistered recipient and makes an adjustment under s 25 (note that an adjustment may still be necessary under s 25AA(1)(a)(iii) to ensure the correct amount of tax is accounted for under the reverse charge in s 8(4B)). To ensure the correct amount of tax is paid in the alternative scenario where the supplier provides a tax invoice under s 24(5B) or (5BB), s 25AA allows the GST-registered recipient to correct the amount of output tax returned and input tax deductions claimed. The recipient can then claim, in the normal manner, a deduction for the portion of the GST that was charged by the non-resident supplier, to the extent that the goods are used for, or available for use in, making taxable supplies. Example 4: supplier incorrectly charges GST on supply to a registered person and recipient applies the reverse charge  Consider Example 3, where Melissa has applied the reverse charge under s 8(4B). However, she subsequently finds out that the price for the phone included GST at the standard rate of 15% (3/23 × NZ$400 = NZ$52.17). Melissa contacts the non-resident supplier and requests a refund for the incorrectly charged GST. Instead of providing a refund, the supplier issues Melissa with a full tax invoice, since the value of the supply is NZ$1,000 or less. The tax invoice enables Melissa to claim an input tax deduction to the extent the phone is used for, or available for use in, making taxable supplies, which means she can deduct NZ$26.09. The non-resident supplier is also not required to make any adjustments under s 25. Under s 25AA(1)(a)(v), Melissa makes an adjustment in the return for the taxable period in which it is discovered that a mistake has been made to correct the amount of output tax and input tax deductions claimed as a result of applying the reverse charge in s 8(4B). Melissa claims a deduction under s 20(3) for the output tax that she accounted for (NZ$60 — s 25AA(2)) and returns output tax for the input tax deduction she claimed earlier (NZ$30 — s 25AA(3)). Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 43  Records to be kept A registered recipient of a supply of goods that is treated as being made in New Zealand under the reverse charge rule must maintain sufficient records of the supply to enable the following details to be ascertained: ▪ the name and the address of the supplier ▪ the date on which, or the period during which, the supply was received ▪ a description of the goods that were supplied ▪ the consideration for the supply, and ▪ the time by which payment for the supply was required: s 24B. Preventing double taxation Under the rules, Customs continues to collect GST on imported consignments valued over $1,000. However, a consignment valued over $1,000 may contain distantly taxable goods on which GST has already been collected by the supplier. For consignments over  $1,000 Customs will not collect GST on the distantly taxable goods in the consignment if documentation is provided to Customs showing that GST has already been collected by the supplier. If GST has been collected on the same good by both Customs and the supplier, the supplier is required to refund the GST they collected to the consumer, but only if the consumer requests a refund and provides a declaration or other confirmation that GST was collected by Customs on the importation of the item. A supplier that provides a GST refund in this situation is entitled to make an adjustment in its GST return to correct its net GST position (provided it has reimbursed the recipient for the GST charged and has received a declaration from the recipient or other confirmation that GST was paid to Customs on the importation of the goods). These rules also apply in the situation where a supplier has incorrectly charged GST on an imported good valued over $1,000. A non-double taxation rule also deals with the situation where a supplier of distantly taxable goods to an unregistered person in New Zealand is required by legislation in another jurisdiction to charge that jurisdiction’s consumption tax on the supply at a rate of more than zero. In this situation, the supplier is entitled to make a deduction that offsets the amount of New Zealand GST payable on the supply to the extent the supply is subject to a consumption tax in another jurisdiction. See s 20(3)(dd). Information requirements Under s 24BAC, suppliers of distantly taxable goods on which GST greater than 0% is charged are required to take reasonable steps to ensure tax information is included on relevant customs documents when those goods are imported. Suppliers need to take reasonable steps to include the following information: ▪ the name and the registration number of the supplier ▪ which goods had GST included in the price, and ▪ which goods had zero GST included in the price.  Alternatively, the Commissioner may agree with suppliers on other information that is acceptable in substitution for the information set out above. A supplier commits a knowledge offence if they knowingly fail to take reasonable steps to ensure that tax information is included on customs documents: s 143A(1)(fc). Under s 24BAB, suppliers of distantly taxable goods need to provide a receipt to consumers at the time of the supply if they have included GST on some or all of the goods in the transaction. The receipt is required to show the following: ▪ the name and registration number of the supplier ▪ the date of the supply and the date the receipt is issued ▪ a description of the goods supplied and other goods imported ▪ the consideration for the goods (this may be expressed in the currency received by the supplier) ▪ the items for which GST has been included, and ▪ the items for which zero GST has been included. Again, the Commissioner may agree with suppliers on alternative information that will be acceptable. If the supplier has not provided a receipt, the recipient can request one and the supplier must provide it within 10 working days. A supplier commits a knowledge offence if they do not do so: s 143A(1)(fb) of the TAA. These information requirements help to ensure that Customs is notified in the approved manner that GST has already been collected on some or all of the goods in a consignment. Electronic marketplaces Special rules apply when distantly taxable goods (other than alcohol and tobacco) are supplied through an electronic marketplace to a  New Zealand-resident consumer. The rules require the operator of the marketplace, as opposed to the underlying supplier, to register and return GST: s 60C. Definition of “electronic marketplace” The definition of “electronic marketplace” is: ▪ a marketplace that is operated by electronic means through which a person (the underlying supplier) makes a supply of goods or of remote services by electronic means through another person (the operator of the marketplace) to a third person (the recipient), and ▪ includes a website, internet portal, gateway, store, distribution platform, or other similar marketplace, and ▪ does not include a marketplace that solely processes payments. The definition is not intended to include “click-through entities” (entities where the ultimate purchaser can click-through a link on their webpage to the supplier). Operator of electronic marketplace The rules apply when a supply of goods is made through an operator of an electronic marketplace to a person involving delivery at a place in New Zealand. The operator of the marketplace is treated as making the supply of distantly taxable goods in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity when: ▪ the underlying supplier of the goods is a non-resident ▪ the marketplace operator or underlying supplier makes, arranges or assists the delivery of the goods to the recipient at a place in New Zealand, and ▪ the goods have individual estimated customs values of $1,000 or less (or the marketplace operator has elected to charge GST on high-value goods (see above)).  However, the operator is not treated as making the supply if: ▪ the documentation provided to the recipient identifies the supply as made by the underlying supplier and not the marketplace ▪ the underlying supplier and the marketplace operator have agreed that the supplier is liable for the payment of tax, and ▪ the marketplace does not: □ authorise the charge to the recipient □ make or authorise the delivery of the supply to the recipient, or □ directly or indirectly set a term or condition under which the supply is made. Where the operator is treated as making the supply, the operator is responsible for returning GST. They include these supplies in their turnover for the purpose of determining whether the registration threshold is exceeded and, if it is exceeded, are liable for the GST. If, in relation to a single supply of goods, more than one operator of an electronic marketplace is liable for tax on the supply, the first operator that authorises a charge or receives consideration for the supply is treated as making the supply. If no operator exists that meets this requirement, the first operator that authorises delivery of the supply is treated as making the supply. Example 5: zero-rated supply of distantly taxable goods from underlying supplier to marketplace operator Page Turners, a US-based book seller that is registered for GST in New Zealand, uses Books Marketplace, an electronic marketplace, to advertise and sell its books to customers in New Zealand. Books Marketplace sets some terms and conditions and collects payments from customers. Books Marketplace is treated as the supplier under s 60C and is therefore responsible for GST on the supply. If, as a result of s 60C, Books Marketplace makes supplies that exceed the registration threshold, it will be required to register and return GST on supplies of goods that are made through its marketplace to customers with a delivery address in New Zealand.  Even though Books Marketplace is treated as the supplier, under s 60(1C) Page Turners can treat its supply as a zero-rated supply to Books Marketplace (as a separate supply to the supply that Books Marketplace is treated as making). This will allow Page Turners to deduct its GST costs incurred in making supplies of books through Books Marketplace. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 24  Approved marketplaces Section 60D allows non-electronic marketplaces to register and return GST. Under the provision, the supply of distantly taxable goods by a non-resident through a non-electronic marketplace to a person involving delivery to a place in New Zealand may be treated as a supply by the operator, not the underlying supplier, if the Commissioner agrees and ▪ the underlying supplier of the goods is a non-resident ▪ the marketplace operator or underlying supplier makes, arranges or assists the delivery of the goods to the recipient at a place in New Zealand, and ▪ the goods have individual estimated customs values of $1,000 or less (or the marketplace operator has elected to charge GST on high-value goods (see above)). The operator must apply to the Commissioner and the Commissioner may take the following into account in exercising her discretion: ▪ whether the marketplace is best placed to determine whether the recipient of the supply of goods: □ is resident in New Zealand, or □ is a registered person ▪ whether the number of underlying suppliers to the marketplace means that return requirements are better satisfied by the marketplace rather than the individual underlying suppliers.  Specific rules for underlying suppliers Two separate supplies When an underlying supplier makes supplies of goods through a marketplace, the underlying supplier and marketplace operator may treat the supply as two separate supplies: ▪ a supply of goods from the underlying supplier to the operator, and ▪ a supply of those goods from the operator of the marketplace to the recipient. The supply to the marketplace operator is zero-rated under s 11(1) (jb). This will generally allow the underlying supplier to claim input tax deductions for GST on expenses incurred in making the supply. Exception for underlying suppliers with New Zealand branch A limited exception to the electronic marketplace rule is provided in s 60C(2C) to deal with a potential situation in relation to a non-resident company that has a New Zealand branch and that makes supplies of goods to consumers in New Zealand through a marketplace. The provision provides that a marketplace operator is not treated as the supplier of distantly taxable goods that are actually supplied by a non-resident underlying supplier if all the following conditions are met: ▪ the underlying supplier of the goods is a non-resident that has a branch in New Zealand ▪ the marketplace operator treats the underlying supplier as a New Zealand resident in relation to the supply (meaning that the operator does not return GST on the supply), and ▪ in treating the underlying supplier as a New Zealand resident, the operator of the marketplace relies on a method for determining the underlying supplier’s residency that is set out in s 60G (discussed below).  This ensures the liability for the GST remains with the underlying supplier in this situation, validating the marketplace operator’s treatment of the supply if it has determined (based on a s 60G method) that it is not the supplier of the goods for GST purposes. Discounts provided by marketplace owners Where a marketplace operator makes a supply of distantly taxable goods that it is treated as being the supplier of under s 60C or 60D and the operator provides a discount for the goods sold on its marketplace by an underlying supplier, the marketplace operator is only required to return GST on the reduced price, ie the amount the consumer actually paid for the supply of goods (and not on the amount of the discount provided by the marketplace). See s 10(7D). Bad debt deduction rule There may be situations where an operator of a marketplace may not receive the payment for a supply of distantly taxable goods sold on its marketplace by an underlying supplier (as the payment may be made by the recipient directly to the underlying supplier). In this situation, a marketplace operator that is treated as the supplier of the goods would need to collect the amount of GST that it is required to return on the supply from the underlying supplier. To provide relief in the situation where a marketplace operator is unable to collect this GST, a special bad debt deduction rule applies to marketplace operators. Under the rule, a marketplace operator is only able to claim a bad debt deduction in its GST return if it wrote off the full amount of money owed by the underlying supplier in relation to the supply, including the marketplace’s sales commission or facilitation fee. A marketplace operator that claims a bad debt deduction and later recovers all or some of the debt in a subsequent taxable period will be required to return GST to the extent of the recovery. See s 26AA. Redeliverers Special rules apply when a “redeliverer” brings (or assists in bringing) goods to New Zealand, and neither the underlying supplier of the goods nor a marketplace operator delivers (or arranges or  assists delivery) of the goods to New Zealand. The rules require the redeliverer to register and return GST on the supply of the goods. Definition of “redeliverer” A “redeliverer” is defined as a person who, under an arrangement with the recipient of the goods, delivers the goods from outside New Zealand to New Zealand, or arranges or assists the delivery of the goods to New Zealand, and does one or more of the following: ▪ provides the use of an address outside New Zealand to which the goods are delivered ▪ arranges or assists the use of an address outside New Zealand to which the goods are delivered ▪ purchases the goods outside New Zealand as an agent of the recipient ▪ arranges or assists the purchase of the goods outside New Zealand. Redeliverer rule A redeliverer is treated as making a supply of distantly taxable goods in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity if all the following conditions are satisfied: ▪ the supply meets the requirements for being a supply of distantly taxable goods (as set out above) if the redeliverer is treated as making the supply ▪ no marketplace operator is the supplier under s 60C or 60D, and ▪ no seller or underlying supplier of the goods makes, arranges or assists the delivery of the goods to New Zealand. See s 60E(1). Priority rule where multiple redeliverers are involved A priority rule provides certainty about which redeliverer is liable for GST in the situation where multiple redeliverers are involved in  bringing distantly taxable goods to New Zealand. The redeliverer that first enters into an arrangement with the recipient of the goods is the person that is treated as making the supply. If no such arrangement exists, the first redeliverer to enter into an arrangement with any other person acting on the recipient’s behalf is treated as the supplier. See s 60E(2). Special valuation rule for redeliverers’ deemed supplies of goods In situations where a redeliverer is deemed to be the supplier of distantly taxable goods, the price paid to the actual supplier will not include New Zealand GST. This means that the redeliverer has to return GST on the supply on the basis that the price is GSTexclusive. This requires a special valuation rule for supplies of distantly taxable goods deemed to be made by redeliverers. The value of a supply of distantly taxable goods by a redeliverer is equal to the consideration paid by the recipient for distantly taxable goods, before the addition of GST: see s 10(7C). This means that the amount of GST to be returned by the redeliverer on the deemed supply of the goods is 15% of the price paid by the recipient for the goods. Amendment to zero-rating rules for international transportation services An amendment ensures that services provided by redeliverers (which would largely consist of international transportation and handling, storage and logistics provided in relation to goods located offshore, or the arranging or facilitation thereof) in relation to goods that are deemed to be supplied by the redeliverer are subject to GST at the rate of 15%, provided that the supply of the goods themselves is also subject to GST at the rate of 15%. See s 11A(1D). The value of a supply of distantly taxable goods and related transport and facilitation services by a redeliverer is therefore equal to: ▪ the consideration paid by the recipient for the distantly taxable goods before the addition of GST (meaning that the amount of  GST on the deemed supply of the goods is 15% of the price paid by the recipient for the goods), plus ▪ the consideration for the supply of the redeliverer’s services with the addition of GST (meaning that the amount of GST on the supply of the redeliverer’s services is 3/23 of the GST-inclusive price paid by the recipient). Example 6: redeliverer providing a mailbox service Matt, a consumer in New Zealand, contracts a redeliverer called C Co to pick up a laptop bag from a UK address that C Co provided to Matt and deliver it to Matt’s home address in Wellington. Matt paid NZ$40 for the bag including the amount charged by the supplier for shipping from its retail store in London to C Co’s UK address. When arranging for the goods to be redelivered to his Wellington address, Matt tells C Co that he paid NZ$40 for the goods. C Co charges NZ$15 plus GST if any for its services as redeliverer in bringing the goods to New Zealand. As the estimated customs value of the laptop bag is less than NZ$1,000, the laptop bag is considered distantly taxable. C Co charges Matt NZ$23.25, comprising: ▪ NZ$6 in GST, which is 15% of the NZ$40 Matt paid the UK supplier for the goods ▪ NZ$15 for C Co’s redelivery services, and ▪ NZ$2.25 in GST, which is 15% of C Co’s GST-exclusive fee for its services. C Co returns NZ$8.25 in GST to Inland Revenue when it files its GST return. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 28  Misrepresentations by recipients or non-resident underlying suppliers of distantly taxable goods The Commissioner has a discretion to treat a person who receives a supply of distantly taxable goods as if they were making a supply of goods and are therefore liable to register and pay the GST that should have been charged. The discretion applies when the person has, for the purposes of avoiding paying tax, knowingly provided incorrect information that leads to GST not being charged on a supply or the goods having a value less than their cost, and this behaviour is repeated or a substantial amount of GST is involved. A recipient who is treated as a supplier is treated as registered from the date on which the supply of the goods is made.  The Commissioner also has a discretion to treat a non-resident underlying supplier of a supply of distantly taxable goods made by a marketplace operator to be the supplier of the goods if they have knowingly provided false information that has caused the operator to return a deficient amount of output tax and this behaviour is repeated or a substantial amount of GST is involved. A supplier who is so treated is also treated as registered from the date on which the supply is made. Taxable periods Non-resident suppliers whose only supplies are of distantly taxable goods (or remote services) have calendar quarterly taxable periods: see s 15(6). However, note that s 15(7) provides a default taxable period of four months for the first period from 1 December 2019 to 31 March 2020 for a non-resident supplier of distantly taxable goods that becomes a registered person during December 2019. Simplified GST returns Simplified “pay only” GST returns are available for use by nonresident suppliers of distantly taxable goods. However, non-resident suppliers that claim input tax deductions for any New Zealand GST costs are required to file full GST returns. Expressing amounts in a foreign currency A non-resident supplier of distantly taxable goods subject to the rules may choose to express the amount of consideration for their supplies in a foreign currency as at the time of supply. If they elect to use the foreign currency, they can convert the amounts into New Zealand currency using the conversion rate at: ▪ the last day of the relevant taxable period ▪ the date of supply ▪ the earlier of the date of filing the relevant return or the due date, or  ▪ another date agreed between the supplier and the Commissioner. Any election to use a foreign currency may not be revoked for at least 24 months, unless the Commissioner agrees otherwise. When a supplier is required to determine the value of an item of goods to determine if the goods are below the threshold for distantly taxable goods, for those purposes they may convert foreign currency amounts into New Zealand currency using the spot exchange rate applying at the time of supply or a currency conversion method approved by the Commissioner. Holding records outside New Zealand and in a language other than English or te reo Māori Section 75(3F) provides an automatic exception for non-resident suppliers that only supply remote services or distantly taxable goods from the requirement to apply to the Commissioner for authorisation to keep and retain records in a language other than English or te reo Māori or at a place outside New Zealand. Exception from the bank account requirement Section 55B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides an exception for non-resident suppliers of distantly taxable goods to the requirement for an offshore person to have a fully functional New Zealand bank account to obtain an IRD number. Methods for marketplace operators and redeliverers to determine GST treatment of supplies Sections 60C and 60E deem operators of electronic marketplaces and redeliverers to be the suppliers of goods that are actually supplied by third parties in certain circumstances. This means electronic marketplace operators and redeliverers need to rely on information provided by underlying suppliers or by customers to determine the GST treatment of these supplies. Where an operator or redeliverer returns a deficient amount of output tax as a consequence of inaccurate, incomplete, insufficient or misleading information provided by a seller, underlying supplier or recipient, the  deficient amount is treated as a reduction in the person’s output tax if they have met the requirements of s 60G: see s 60F. For an operator or redeliverer to meet the requirements of s 60G: ▪ the deficiency must arise from the inaccurate, incomplete, insufficient or misleading information ▪ the operator or redeliverer must have adopted the default methods provided (see below) if they did not know the residency of the underlying supplier, the address the goods were delivered, or the amount of consideration paid for the supply by the recipient, and ▪ they must have relied on the inaccurate, etc, information in good faith and on reasonable grounds. For an electronic marketplace operator that does not know the residency of an underlying supplier, the operator must: ▪ treat the underlying supplier as a resident if they have— □ information that the underlying supplier is a company incorporated, or with its centre of management, in New Zealand □ a New Zealand business number for the underlying supplier, or □ two or more items of information listed in s 60G(5) (see below) that are non-contradictory and support the conclusion the underlying supplier is resident in New Zealand and are more reliable than other listed information the person holds that supports the contrary view, or ▪ treat the underlying supplier as a non-resident if the above does not apply. For an electronic marketplace operator that does not know the address to which the goods are to be delivered, the operator must:  ▪ treat the supply as being made to the recipient at a place in New Zealand if they— □ have two or more items of information listed in s 60G(5) (see below) that are non-contradictory and support the conclusion the recipient is located in New Zealand, and □ does not have two or more reliable items of listed information that are non-contradictory and support the contrary view, or ▪ treat the supply as being made to the recipient at a place outside New Zealand if the contrary view is not supported by the listed information held. The items of information listed in s 60G(5) are as follows: ▪ an address of a physical location for the person such as a mailing or billing address ▪ if the person is the underlying supplier for the supply, a New Zealand GST registration number for the person ▪ bank details (including the account the person uses for making payments, or the billing address held by the bank, or the account to which the operator person makes payments of amounts owed to the person) ▪ the internet protocol address of the device used by the person or another geolocation method ▪ the mobile country code of the international mobile subscriber identity stored on the SIM card used by the person ▪ the location of the person’s fixed landline ▪ if the person is the underlying supplier, the location from where the goods are being shipped, and ▪ other commercially relevant information.  For a redeliverer that is not responsible for the purchase of the distantly taxable goods in the supply, the redeliverer must: ▪ require the recipient of the supply to disclose the value of the consideration before the delivery of the supply, and ▪ obtain a receipt issued by the seller of the goods or other confirmation by the seller of the value of the consideration for the supply. The Commissioner also has a discretion to prescribe or agree to alternative methods for electronic marketplace operators and redeliverers. In doing so, the Commissioner may take into account: ▪ commercially relevant information that is available to the person and the reliability of this information ▪ the cost for the person of complying with the requirements ▪ the existing methods available to the person for preventing and remedying situations where incorrect information is provided. These default rules and the Commissioner’s discretion are intended to reduce compliance costs for electronic marketplace operators and redeliverers in situations where they are unable to strictly apply the rules (owing to insufficient commercially available information), by allowing the person to use other relevant information that is commercially available. Offences With effect from 23 March 2020, a recipient of a supply of distantly taxable goods from a non-resident supplier commits a knowledge offence if they knowingly provide altered, false or misleading information relating to their residence in New Zealand or their status as a registered person for the purposes of avoiding the payment of GST (s 143A(1)(g) of the Tax Administration Act 1994). In addition, an underlying supplier supplying distantly taxable goods through a marketplace commits a knowledge offence if the supplier knowingly provides altered, false or misleading information relating  to the country or territory in which they are resident (s 143A(1)(h)). Such misinformation could result in the operator of the marketplace underpaying GST to Inland Revenue. See ¶14-250 for a discussion of knowledge offences. Agency rules New Zealand-resident agents acting for non-resident suppliers that supply distantly taxable goods to New Zealand-resident consumers may agree with the supplier to treat the agent (and not the principal) as making the supply in the course and furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by them: s 60(1A) and (1AB). If this option is exercised, the agent would be required to register and return GST on the supplies of distantly taxable goods. Since the agent is a New Zealand resident, they would be treated as any other resident supplier of goods and services and, therefore, would be required to return GST on both supplies to New Zealand consumers and GST-registered businesses. Transitional provision A transitional provision allows suppliers to treat payments made after 1 December 2019 for supplies under certain contracts entered into before that date as not being subject to the rules for the term of the agreement or up to 396 days from the date of the contract, whichever is earlier: s 85C. The provision applies when the contract is for a fixed term that spans 1 December 2019, provides for periodic payments that are treated as successive supplies, and the consideration under the contract must be set or reviewed for periods of 396 days or less. One example where the provision might apply is a magazine subscription purchased on a short-term contract with periodic payments spanning the commencement date of the rules. For a detailed discussion and more examples of the application of the rules, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 2–52. Law: GST ss 2(1), 4B, 5(11G), (27), (28), 8(3), (4B), (4E), (4F), 8BB, 10(3E), (7C), (7D), (7E), 10B, 10C, 11(1)(jb), 11A(1)(jbb), (1D), 12, 12B, 15(6), (7), 20(3)(dd), (3L), (3LB), (4C), (4D), 24(5)(bc), (5B),  (5BB), 24BAB, 24BAC, 24B, 25(1)(aab), (1)(bb), 25AA, 26AA, 51(1C), 51B(7), (8), 60, 60C-60G, 77(2), (5), 85C; TAA ss 55B(2), 143A(1)(fb), (fc)  ¶32-065 GST and imported services Imported services were not specifically addressed by the provisions of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) until 1 January 2005. From this date certain services in business-to-business transactions became subject to GST through the reverse charge mechanism. The mechanism was introduced to address the imbalance between imported goods, which were subject to GST, and imported services, which were not. For further discussion on the reverse charge mechanism, see ¶32-400 and ¶32-410. In contrast to imported goods where GST is levied at the point of importation, imported services fall within the “supply” rules. This means that the recipient of the imported services may be liable to account for GST to Inland Revenue. Non-resident suppliers who perform the services in New Zealand and have a fixed or permanent place of business in New Zealand are deemed to be resident for GST purposes. Refer to s 2 of the GST Act for definitions of “resident” and “non-resident”. These definitions make cross-references to ss YD 1 and YD 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007 so that a taxpayer resident in New Zealand for income tax purposes will also be resident in New Zealand for GST purposes. For discussion on cross-border supplies of telecommunications services, see ¶32-066. From 1 October 2016, new rules require overseas suppliers to register and return GST when they sell services (including online products such as e-books, music and videos) to New Zealand consumers. For discussion on these new rules for remote services, see ¶32-067. Law: GST ss 2(1), 5B, 8(4B)  ¶32-066 GST and cross-border telecommunications services A “telecommunications supplier” is a person whose principal activity is the supply of telecommunications services. “Telecommunications services” includes the transmission, emission or reception of signals, writing, sound or information by wire, cable or other technical system and supply of access to the Internet but does not include the content of the telecommunication. Telecommunications services will be treated as being supplied in New Zealand if the supplier is not resident in New Zealand and a person physically present in New Zealand initiates the supply, whether on behalf of another person or not. In this case s 8(6) overrides the general “place of supply rule” under s 8(2). This section does not apply to supplies between telecommunications suppliers: see s 8(7). A second exception in s 8(8) ensures that, unless the supplier and recipient agree otherwise, a supply of telecommunications services from a non-resident to a registered person in New Zealand is not subject to GST. The rules require non-resident telecommunications suppliers to identify customers who initiate telecommunications services in New Zealand and the GST status of such customers. Section 8(9) sets out the criteria to determine which party to a supply of telecommunications services has initiated the supply. If more than one person satisfies these factors, the person initiating the supply is the person who appears highest on the following list: ▪ the person who controls the commencement of the supply ▪ the person who pays for the service, and ▪ the person who contracts for the supply. When the use of the physical location test is impractical for a class of customer or service, s 8A deems there to be a supply of services in New Zealand when a person with a billing address in New Zealand initiates a supply of telecommunications services from a  telecommunications supplier outside New Zealand. This “billing address” test is used for a member of a class of customer or service and it must be used consistently for all members of that class of customer or service. Address means physical residential or business address and does not include a post office box number. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 3, April 2006 at 13. Offshore telecommunications suppliers who make more than $60,000 of supplies to persons in New Zealand will have to register for GST purposes. Non-resident telecommunications suppliers will not have to register for GST solely as a result of making supplies that would otherwise be treated as being made in New Zealand under the rules for telecommunications suppliers if the supplies are made to non-resident customers “roaming” in New Zealand. See s 51(1)(e). Supplies of telecommunications services are zero rated where they are supplied: ▪ by New Zealand resident telecommunications suppliers to overseas telecommunications suppliers, s 11AB(a), or ▪ to a non-resident person (other than a telecommunications supplier) and the service is initiated outside New Zealand, s 11AB(b). See further Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 69– 70. ▸ Note: In May 2019, the government released an Officials’ Issues Paper, “GST on telecommunications services”. The current special rules for telecommunication services are out of date and inconsistent with international best practice, based on guidelines developed by the OECD, and so the government announced changes that were originally intended to apply from 1 October 2020. In summary, the issues paper proposed that: ▪ Most of the special rules in the GST Act for supplies of telecommunications services be repealed.  ▪ The GST treatment of most telecommunications services be aligned with the treatment of other remote services and determined based on the residency of the consumer. ▪ However, the GST treatment of some specific telecommunications services would be determined by the physical location of the recipient rather than their residency if, to receive the services, the recipient needs to be at a specific location. Following consultation on the issues paper, amending legislation was included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020. The proposed changes will add a definition of “mobile roaming services”. These will be defined as mobile telecommunications services supplied to a person’s mobile device while they are outside the country of their usual mobile network. The country of a person’s usual mobile network will be determined by the country code of the subscriber identity module (SIM) used in their mobile device. The definition of “mobile roaming services” will also include services supplied to enable a person to receive mobile telecommunications services when they are outside the country of their usual mobile network. This is intended to capture roaming deals offered by telecommunications suppliers that enable their customers to continue using their regular mobile plan while overseas for a flat daily or weekly fee. If a person travelling overseas uses a local SIM in their mobile device, they would not be using mobile roaming services. This is because their usual mobile network would be determined by the country code of the SIM – which in this case would be the country they are travelling in. Mobile roaming services received by a person whose usual mobile network is in New Zealand will be “outbound mobile roaming services”. Under the proposed changes, these services will become subject to GST at the standard rate of 15%.  Mobile roaming services received by a person who is in New Zealand and whose usual mobile network is outside New Zealand will be “inbound mobile roaming services”. These services will no longer be subject to GST as they will be zero-rated, if supplied by a resident, or treated as being made outside New Zealand (and therefore not subject to GST), if supplied by a non-resident. Section 51(1)(e) currently ensures that non-residents are not required to register for GST if their only supplies in New Zealand are inbound mobile roaming services. As inbound mobile roaming services supplied by a non-resident to non-residents travelling in New Zealand will be treated as being made outside New Zealand and therefore not subject to GST under the proposed changes, s 51(1)(e) will no longer be necessary and it is proposed to repeal the provision. The proposed amendments are intended to apply from 1 April 2022. Law: GST ss 2(1), 8(5)–(9), 8A, 11AB, 51(1)(e)  ¶32-067 GST and remote services With application to supplies made on or after 1 October 2016, new rules apply GST to cross-border “remote services” supplied by nonresident suppliers (including e-books, music, videos and software purchased from offshore websites) to New Zealand-resident consumers, by requiring the offshore supplier to register and return GST on these supplies. The rules broadly follow the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development guidelines, which establish an international set of principles for determining when countries should have the right to tax cross-border services and intangibles. The rules are discussed below. Examples are taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 12–29 unless otherwise noted. Change to the place of supply rules  Section 8(3)(c) provides that services are treated as being supplied in New Zealand (and therefore subject to GST) when a non-resident supplier supplies remote services to a New Zealand resident, unless the services are physically performed in New Zealand by a person who is in New Zealand at the time the services are performed (in which case the supply would be subject to GST under s 8(3)(b)). Supplies of remote services by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand GST-registered recipients for their taxable activity are treated as being supplied outside New Zealand and therefore not subject to GST, unless the supplier chooses otherwise. Where the supplier chooses to treat the supply as made in New Zealand, the supply is zero-rated. The non-resident supplier is then able to claim back any New Zealand GST costs incurred in making the zero-rated supplies. Note that supplies of remote services to a non-registered person resident in New Zealand are excluded from the zero-rating rule in s 11A(1)(j) (which zero-rates services that are physically performed outside New Zealand). However, supplies of facilitation or arranging services that arrange services that are not themselves remote services and that are physically performed outside New Zealand will still be zero-rated under s 11A(1)(jb). This applies irrespective of whether the supplier of the arranging service is a resident or nonresident. GST registration threshold Non-resident suppliers are only required to register and return GST when their supplies of remote services to New Zealand resident consumers exceed NZ$60,000 in a 12-month period. Non-resident suppliers are able to use a fair and reasonable method of converting foreign currency amounts into New Zealand currency for these purposes. This includes converting amounts to New Zealand currency as at the time of supply, using the exchange rate at the time of testing the threshold, or using an average exchange rate over the period. The method chosen must be used on a consistent basis.  As remote services supplied by a non-resident to a New Zealand GST-registered business are generally treated as not being supplied in New Zealand (and therefore not subject to GST), these supplies will not count towards the registration threshold. However, if the supplier chooses to treat the supplies as made in New Zealand, and thus as zero-rated supplies, they will count towards the threshold. Remote services Under the rules, GST applies to cross-border “remote services” provided by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand-resident consumers. The rules apply GST to a broad range of “remote services”, rather than targeting the rules at specific digital services. “Remote services” are defined to mean “a service that, at the time of the performance of the service, has no necessary connection between (a) the place where the service is physically performed; and (b) the location of the recipient of the services”. Whether a service is a “remote service” depends on whether the nature of the service requires that the recipient is present when the service is physically performed. If a service is either actually supplied, or is capable of being supplied, when the recipient is not present,