 the time, place and circumstances in which the search occurs. The reasonableness obligation is founded on s 21 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990. The form of warrant is prescribed by subpart 3 of Pt 4 of the SSA, and s 103 of the SSA sets out what particulars the warrant must contain. Every person exercising the power of entry conferred by the warrant is required to produce the warrant and evidence of identity on first entering the private dwelling, and after that whenever reasonably required to do so: s 17D(4) of the TAA. R v Hewitt (2005) 22 NZTC 19,309 (DC) confirmed that Inland Revenue officers could copy documents obtained at a private dwelling. A prison cell can be the living premises and the usual abode of a prison inmate and, thus, come within the definition of “private dwelling”. See Re C of IR (application for a search warrant) (2005) 22 NZTC 19,123. Information demands for production of documents A person who receives an information demand from the Commissioner under s 17B must provide all information the  Commissioner considers is necessary or relevant for any purpose relating to: ▪ the administration or enforcement of an Inland Revenue Act ▪ the administration or enforcement of any matter arising from or connected with a function lawfully conferred on the Commissioner. A requirement to provide information includes a requirement to produce a document. A person includes an officer employed in, or in connection with, a government department or public authority, and any other public officer. The notice from the Commissioner may require information to be verified by a statutory declaration, provided to a particular Inland Revenue office or provided in a manner acceptable to the Commissioner. There are some exceptions to the requirement to comply with one of the Commissioner’s information demands. These encompass documents covered by legal professional privilege (¶1-595) and tax advice documents (¶1-600). Information treated as being in a person’s knowledge, possession or control Information or a document in the knowledge, possession or control of a non-resident is treated as being in the knowledge, possession or control of a New Zealand resident if the New Zealand resident controls the non-resident directly or indirectly: s 17E(1). For this purpose, the following rules apply: ▪ a New Zealand resident is treated as holding anything held by an associated person resident in New Zealand or an associated controlled foreign company, and ▪ a law of a foreign country relating to the secrecy of information is ignored.  Information from large multinational groups Similar provisions apply to a member of a large multinational group of companies with effect from 27 June 2018. Information or a document relevant to the taxation of the group is treated as being in the knowledge, possession or control of a member of the group if that information or document is in the knowledge, possession or control of the member or any other group member: s 17E(2). Again, the secrecy laws of foreign countries are to be disregarded. In practice, it is anticipated that the Commissioner will request the information from the group member who is resident or potentially subject to tax in New Zealand. This group member will then source the required information from non-resident members of their group. The information will be passed on to the relevant New Zealand taxpayer who will then supply this information to the Commissioner. In addition, s 17G is designed to incentivise large multinational groups to comply with a request for information under s 17B by setting out some specific consequences that can be applied if the multinational fails to provide an adequate response within three months. These consequences enable the Commissioner to make a tax assessment based on the (limited) information it has available and to prevent the requested information from being admitted as evidence in a dispute or court proceeding. A civil penalty also applies to members of a large multinational group if they fail to comply with a request for information (see ¶14-055). These rules only apply to members of large multinational groups. A large multinational group is defined in s 3 to include multinational groups that exceed the revenue threshold of font=Arial charset=unicode code=8364 descr='[euro]'750m of consolidated global turnover (based on the threshold in para 5.53 of the OECD transfer pricing guidelines). Information relating to offshore payments The Commissioner also has the power to issue an information demand requiring a person to produce information concerning  offshore payments for which a deduction may be allowed: s 17F. See further at ¶10-730. Information for tax policy development From 7 December 2020, s 17GB clarifies that the Commissioner’s information-gathering powers extend to requiring information solely for the purpose of tax policy development. The section provides that the Commissioner can require a person to provide any information she considers relevant for a purpose relating to the development of policy for the improvement or reform of the tax system, which includes the social policy products administered. The Commissioner is not permitted to use any information obtained under this section as evidence in proceedings against the person providing the information. Copying and removal of documents Once a revenue officer has obtained access to a document, he or she may take an extract from it, copy it or remove it for copying, all without paying any charge. The officer may also remove and retain a document for a full and complete inspection. See s 17C. These powers apply to documents accessed under s 17, provided under s 17B or 17G, or produced under s 17H. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to s 17C to ensure that the Commissioner’s power to take copies and make extracts also extends to documents produced in the course of the Commissioner’s inquiries under s 17I (see below). The amendment is intended to apply from the date of enactment of the Bill. Documents removed for copying must be copied and returned as soon as practicable. Documents removed and retained for full inspection can be retained for as long as is necessary to undertake the inspection if the occupier consents or the documents have been obtained by warrant under s 17D. The owner of a document provided to, or accessed or removed by, the Commissioner has the right to inspect it and copy it at the  premises to which it has been removed. There is an on-going right to copy and inspect at all reasonable times thereafter. However, it appears that copying of a document by its owner before a revenue officer removes it from the person’s premises is not specifically excluded under s 17C(5). A copy of a document certified by (or on behalf of) the Commissioner is admissible as evidence in court as if it were the original. Court order for production of information or return The Commissioner may ascertain that a person required to file a tax return has not done so, or has not fully complied with an information demand under s 17B. In either circumstance, the Commissioner may apply to the District Court for an order that the information or return is to be provided. Notice of the application must be given to the person against whom the order is sought, and also to any other person as the court directs. See s 17H. A prosecution arising from the person’s non-compliance may also be brought. The Commissioner and all parties notified of the application have a right of audience before the court. The court may order the information be provided to the court and review the information to determine whether: ▪ it should be provided to the Commissioner ▪ it is subject to legal professional privilege ▪ it is contained in a tax advice document and, if so, whether it must be disclosed under ss 20E, 20F or 20G (which deal largely with disclosure of attachments to tax advice documents and tax contextual information). The District Court may order a person to produce all or a part of the information at issue to the Commissioner, if and to the extent the court is satisfied: ▪ no legal professional privilege applies, and  ▪ the information is likely to be relevant for a purpose relating to the administration or enforcement of a revenue law, or a matter arising from (or connected with) a function lawfully conferred on the Commissioner. A person who is ordered to produce information to the Commissioner that is not kept in a document must make necessary arrangements to ensure the information can be viewed and copied. Section 17H is paramount and applies despite any enactment or rule of law that may oblige a person to keep information secret, or not to disclose information, or not to perform an obligation. Compliance with a court order under s 17H is not a breach of the enactment, rule or obligation. A person is not excused from having to comply with s 17H on the ground that: ▪ providing the information could or might prove a breach of a tax obligation or subject the person to a fine, penalty, or conviction, or ▪ the person could claim another privilege in relation to the provision of the information in proceedings in a court. A person who fails to comply with the terms of a court order under s 17H commits an offence. See s 143G and ¶14-270. Commissioner’s inquiry Under s 17I, the Commissioner is authorised to notify a person that they must: ▪ attend and provide information, or ▪ produce documents in their possession or control which either contain the information or are likely to contain it. These powers are exercisable for the purpose of obtaining information: ▪ in relation to a person’s tax liability, or  ▪ that is required for the purposes of the administration or enforcement of an Inland Revenue Act, or in carrying out any other lawful function of the Commissioner. The Commissioner may require any person to attend and give evidence on oath, orally or otherwise. An authorised IR officer may administer an oath. It is a criminal offence to refuse or wilfully neglect to appear, to take an oath as a witness, to answer any question touching upon the subject matter of the inquiry or to produce documents. See s 143F and ¶14-275. The person summoned or examined by the Commissioner cannot be excused from answering questions on the ground that the answers may be incriminating. However, any answer given is inadmissible in criminal proceedings except when those proceedings are for perjury. A person who is summoned is entitled to receive a reasonable amount on account of travelling expenses and loss of time. See s 17K. District Court inquiry The Commissioner may apply to a District Court judge requesting that an inquiry be held for the purpose of obtaining information relevant to a person’s tax liabilities or for the purposes of the administration or enforcement of the Inland Revenue Acts or for carrying out any other lawful function of the Commissioner. See s 17J. At the inquiry the judge has the same jurisdiction and authority in relation to the summoning and examination of a person that the judge would have in respect of a witness in a civil action in the judge’s ordinary jurisdiction. The person who is summoned and examined has, subject to the Inland Revenue Acts, all such rights and liabilities as he or she would have if he or she were a witness in a civil action. Sections 17K and 143F, discussed above in relation to the Commissioner’s inquiry, also apply to a District Court inquiry.  Regulations providing for regular collection of bulk data With effect from 18 March 2019, s 17L provides explicitly for regulations to be made allowing the Commissioner to collect, on a continuing and regular basis, bulk information in the form of datasets if it is considered necessary or relevant for a purpose relating to the administration or enforcement of a matter arising from or connected with a function lawfully conferred on the Commissioner. Certain safeguards are included to protect the privacy of taxpayers, such as requiring the Minister of Revenue be satisfied that the regulations are made for relevant purposes, the information collected is necessary for revenue purposes and that the regulations will not unreasonably impinge on the privacy of individuals. Draft regulations will also have to be distributed as part of a consultative process. Commissioner’s use of information Section 17M sets out how IR can use information collected from or in relation to taxpayers. Notwithstanding any other Act, nothing prevents the Commissioner from: ▪ using or re-using information obtained under the TAA for the purposes of carrying into effect any Inland Revenue Act, or carrying out or supporting a function lawfully conferred on the Commissioner, or ▪ using or re-using information obtained under an Inland Revenue Act for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the TAA or carrying out or supporting a function lawfully conferred on the Commissioner. Use of information by the Commissioner includes use in a permitted disclosure (see ¶1-604). Commissioner’s practice IR previously released standard practice statement SPS 12/01, “Recording Inland Revenue interviews” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 5, June 2012 at 45) and operational statement OS 13/02, “Section 17 notices” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 8,  September 2013 at 18). SPS 12/01 outlines IR practice when electronically recording an interview with a taxpayer and applies from 19 April 2012. OS 13/02 sets out the procedures the Commissioner follows when issuing notices under former s 17 and applies from 14 August 2013. Although the sections referred to in the statements were replaced in 2019, no policy changes were intended and the statements still provide the most recent explanation of the Commissioner’s practices. SPS 12/01 SPS 12/01 sets out the Commissioner’s practice when electronically recording an interview with a taxpayer. The statement notes that when an interviewee is attending an interview voluntarily, the interview will be recorded only with the consent and co-operation of the interviewee. However, all interviews carried out under (now) s 17I of the TAA must be recorded. The interviewee’s consent is not required for these interviews. Attendance at an inquiry by the Commissioner under s 17I is compulsory. OS 13/02 In addition to other things, OS 13/02 provides that before issuing a (now) s 17B notice, IR will consider the following: ▪ the reason for requiring the information ▪ the impact of the demand on the suppliers of the information requested ▪ reasons an informal request is not appropriate ▪ whether the information is available publicly ▪ whether the Commissioner requires disclosure of the tax contextual information (see ¶1-600) ▪ the effect upon the disputes resolution process ▪ IR’s intention to ensure compliance with the notice, and  ▪ the use of powers under (now) s 17 of the TAA. The statement also comments on: ▪ requests for significant amounts of documentation ▪ the effect of legal professional privilege ▪ the right to claim non-disclosure for tax advice documents (see ¶1-600) ▪ requests relating to advice and other work papers prepared by accountants ▪ requests to persons other than the taxpayer ▪ requests for certain information from tax agents, and ▪ non-compliance with a s 17B notice. Non-compliance with the information request notice will result in IR invoking the statutory remedies to compel taxpayer cooperation. For example, the Commissioner may seek a court order under s 17H(1) that the information be provided. Generally, an offence would be committed should there be any failure to comply with the request. There is a defence recognised by s 143A(2) when the recipient of the notice is able to prove that the information is not within the knowledge, possession or control of the person. Another exception is legal professional privilege. See ¶1595. Note that the Court of Appeal has held that the terms of an operational statement issued by the Commissioner for the guidance of taxpayers does not amount to a limitation on the scope of the Commissioner’s particularly broad statutory power to issue (now) s 17B notices. In Chatfield & Co Ltd v C of IR (2017) 28 NZTC ¶23015, the Court of Appeal confirmed that OS 13/02 is no more than a comprehensive and correct explanation of the nature and extent of the Commissioner’s statutory power to demand information and the  circumstances in which she proposes to exercise that power. The only limitation on the Commissioner’s power is found in s 17B itself. The information-gathering power is very wide, but it does not mean that the Commissioner’s powers cannot be impugned. Any notice given in exercise of the power must in its terms conform to the statutory limitations if it is to be valid. See FC of T v The Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd 79 ATC 4039. Section 17B must be utilised in conformity with the purposes set out; it cannot be used for an improper purpose. See Schwass and Robertson v Mackay (1983) 6 NZTC 61,641. In exercising the power under s 17B, it is likely that the courts will say that the Commissioner or her officers must act fairly (the courts have said this at least in relation to the pre-assessment phase). However, the Commissioner is not required to identify particular taxpayers when requesting information under s 17B. The Commissioner is entitled to request information concerning a class of unidentified potential taxpayers. Abuse of powers The Commissioner has a statutory responsibility to identify persons who are not returning taxable income and paying tax. The legislation does not require that the information obtained must be relevant to the tax liability of some specific person or persons whose tax liability is under investigation. In New Zealand Stock Exchange v C of IR, The National Bank of New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,147, the Privy Council commented that if the particulars sought went beyond what was required for the purposes of enabling the Commissioner to carry out his statutory functions, to the extent that they were unduly oppressive or burdensome, the court would be entitled to intervene. But a court would intervene only if it was satisfied the Commissioner had exceeded or abused his powers. In Green v Housden (1993) 15 NZTC 10,053, the Court of Appeal held that, in the circumstances, a request by IR under s 17 of the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 (now s 17B of the TAA) to the taxpayer’s professional advisers for the production of books and documents was unreasonable and an abuse of the Commissioner’s powers. However, in Singh v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,471, the High Court noted that s 17 of the Inland Revenue Department Act  implicitly abrogates the right to refuse to answer questions tending to incriminate. The taxpayer’s failure to provide information, books and documents as requested was a breach of that section. Limitation of powers under ss 16 and 17 Although advance notice of an inspection is not required, there are some limitations on the rights of access and inspection. An officer must be authorised by the Commissioner. If the officer does not carry a warrant giving him or her the required authority to inspect, it appears that access can validly be refused. Access to private dwellings is expressly limited to where the officer has the consent of the occupier or a warrant has been issued under s 17D of the TAA. The provisions do not provide for entry by force. A reasonable request that legal advice be obtained before complying with the Commissioner’s request must be allowed. The taxpayer has only to produce those documents which the Commissioner, acting reasonably and having properly considered the question, deems necessary or relevant to the inquiry. Also, the subject of a search must be allowed a reasonable and legitimate opportunity to approach the court for a relief from compliance for the request of access. There is no general power for the Commissioner to raid a taxpayer’s premises and remove anything the Commissioner chooses. Although the Commissioner has a right to remove documents, this right extends only to documents that have been produced by the taxpayer. The Commissioner’s more likely practice is to use the courts to impose sanctions (fines) rather than the seizure of material by force. Additional provisions under the TAA In addition to the powers discussed above, there are further sections in the TAA that have the effect of enabling the Commissioner to obtain information. For example, under s 44, the Commissioner may require a special return of income from such persons as non-resident traders or persons she believes are about to depart from New Zealand, or have ceased to carry on a business. Under s 58, the Commissioner may require bodies such as charitable organisations  to produce records showing the source and application of their funds. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 16, 16B, 16C, 17-17M, 44, 58, 143F, 143G, 227F  ¶1-595 Legal professional privilege A taxpayer can decline to comply with an Inland Revenue (IR) request and, consequently, certain information or documents will be privileged from disclosure. There are two kinds of legal professional privilege. These are solicitor–client and litigation privilege. Solicitor–client Solicitor–client privilege, which is enacted by s 20 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), covers the position of confidential information passing between a legal practitioner (as defined by s 20(7) and the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act 2006) in his or her professional capacity and another legal practitioner in that capacity or a legal practitioner and a client. Certain information or documents are privileged from disclosure when they are made or brought into existence for the dominant purpose of obtaining or giving legal advice or assistance. Communication does not necessarily have to pass directly between the persons referred to. Privilege can still apply if communication passes through an agent of any of the relevant persons. There are exceptions to privilege. Privilege does not apply when the communication was brought into existence for the purpose of committing some illegal or wrongful act. However, privilege will not be waived on the Commissioner’s suspicion of fraud. See Case W17 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,172. No protection from disclosure is conferred on a solicitor’s trust account records and such records of client investment income that the solicitor may hold. See Allen Allen & Hemsley v FC of T 89 ATC 4294. The right to claim legal professional privilege is not a conclusive reason for withholding information; rather, it is one that may be outweighed by other considerations which make it desirable in the  public interest to make the information available. See s 9(2)(h) of the Official Information Act 1982. Example 1: In-house solicitors holding current practising certificates are entitled to claim legal professional privilege so long as they are acting as lawyers and not in some other capacity such as a specialist adviser or executive. See Miller v C of IR, McDougall v C of IR (No 1) (1997) 18 NZTC 13,001.  See also the Privy Council decision in B v Auckland District Law Society (2003) 21 NZTC 18,221. In this case, the court examined the issues of legal professional privilege and litigation privilege in the context s 101 of the Law Practitioners Act. Briefly, the court held that s 101(3)(d) of the Act did not expressly exclude legal professional privilege. Also, limited waiver of privilege was possible. Note that the Law Practitioners Act was repealed and replaced by the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act. In C and Multiple Parties v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,178, the High Court held that evidence given by a witness referring to legal advice that a taxpayer had obtained led to an implied waiver of legal professional privilege. In Case T32 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,221, the Taxation Review Authority held that the opinions and reports from legal staff employed at IR constituted confidential communications between a client and a client’s legal adviser. Their dominant purpose was the giving of legal advice and they were not created as part of an executive function. The role of the writer of an opinion must be considered, not the consequence of the opinion. In Martinovich v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-077, the High Court held that the common law on solicitor-client privilege was applicable to the Commissioner. The report in question in that case was held to be legal advice provided by an in-house lawyer, not an executive decision under delegated authority, and was not discoverable. A similar result was reached in Accountants First Limited v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-081.  Litigation privilege Litigation privilege arises when a communication is made between a solicitor and a third party (whether made directly or through an agent) or a client and a third party, and that communication relates to existing or contemplated litigation. The privilege protects the process of gathering evidence for lawyers acting for a party in civil or criminal litigation, or a party threatened with such litigation. Although s 20 of the TAA appears to relate only to solicitor–client privilege (and to codify some aspects of the existing common law in respect of solicitor–client privilege), it is unclear whether it removes litigation privilege as well. In C of IR v West-Walker [1954] NZLR 191 , the court stated that privilege would stand even in the face of express statutory provisions. The tacit acceptance of litigation privilege has since been acknowledged by the courts. However, in order for a claim of litigation privilege to be successful, it must be shown that the communication relates to a dominant purpose of conducting or advising on actual or reasonably anticipated litigation. Example 2: Interview notes which recorded interviews between a bank and its auditors were not subject to litigation privilege because they were not prepared for the dominant purpose of defending the bank. Although the bank’s solicitors had, as one of their purposes, the gathering of evidence for a prosecution, this was not a dominant purpose. The presence of a lawyer at the interview did not in itself confer privilege on the interview notes, particularly when they were not the lawyer’s notes. See Dinsdale v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,583 (CA).  Law: TAA s 20  ¶1-600 Privilege for tax advisors The concept of solicitor–client privilege includes certain confidential communications between a tax advisor and a client (generally referred to as a “tax advice document”). Under the common law accountants enjoyed no similar protection to solicitor-client privilege. However, since 21 June 2005 tax advice documents have been  afforded protection if they meet strict statutory requirements. A document is eligible to be a tax advice document if the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ it is confidential, and □ it is created for the main purpose of instructing a tax advisor to act for a person by giving advice to the person about the operation and effect of tax laws, or □ it is created by a tax advisor or, if the tax advisor is in public practice, an employee of the tax advisor’s firm, for the main purpose of recording research and analysis that is performed for the main purpose of enabling the tax advisor to give advice about the operation and effect of tax laws, or □ it is created by a tax advisor or, if the tax advisor is in public practice, an employee of the tax advisor’s firm, for the main purpose of giving tax advice or recording advice given about the operation and effect of tax laws. A document that is created for the purposes of committing, promoting or assisting the committing of an illegal or wrongful act is excluded from the privilege for tax advisors. A tax advisor must be a natural person who is subject to a professional code of conduct in giving tax advice and is subject to a disciplinary process that enforces compliance with the code of conduct. The person must also be a member of an “approved advisor group”. An “approved advisor group” is a group approved by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue (the Commissioner) that includes natural persons who: ▪ have a significant function of giving advice on the operation and effect of tax laws ▪ are subject to a professional code of conduct in giving the advice, and  ▪ are subject to a disciplinary process that enforces compliance with that code of conduct. The following organisations have received advisor group status to date: The New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants, Accountants and Tax Agents Institute of New Zealand, CPA Australia and Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand. Therefore, tax advice given by a member of any of these Institutes may qualify for privilege. In Blakeley v C of IR (2008) 23 NZTC 21,865, the High Court commented that the protection afforded by s 20B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) is much more confined than legal professional privilege (see ¶1-595) both as to the information protected and the conditions attaching to its application. Unlike legal professional privilege, privilege for a tax advice document is not a response to public interest considerations. Instead the privilege protects defined parts of a limited category of written communications. The High Court also held that a waiver of privilege could not arise under ss 20B–20G given that tax advice documents were not automatically protected from disclosure. Claim for privilege The statutory privilege afforded under s 20B does not affect the common law legal privilege. Privilege for a tax advice document must be claimed (form IR 519) and include a brief description of the form and contents of the document, the name of the tax advisor for whom the document was intended and the date that the document was created. If privilege is being claimed in relation to a document created by a tax advisor or an employee of a tax advisor’s firm, the claim for privilege must include a brief description of the document, the name of the tax advisor giving the tax advice in relation to which the document was created, the approved advisor group to which the tax advisor belonged when the document was created, the legislative authority and the type of revenue that was the subject of the tax advisor’s advice and the date on which the document was created. If the privilege is claimed by a tax advisor acting on behalf of a person,  the claim must include notification by the tax advisor of their authority to act on behalf of the client in the matter of privilege. The privilege extends to an information request made under a discovery obligation for a challenge, unless: ▪ a court or Taxation Review Authority (TRA) has not held a case management conference or directions hearing, or directed that no such hearing is to be held, and ▪ the issues raised by the challenge are not substantially similar to the issues in another challenge before the court or TRA at that date, which has not had a case management conference or directions hearing, or given the direction that no case management conference or directions hearing will be held. A discovery obligation is defined as an order of a court or TRA, or notice of discovery in proceedings before a court or TRA, requiring disclosure of information to the Commissioner in relation to proceedings before the court or TRA. Time limits The claim for privilege must be made within a certain time. The time limits are summarised below: ▪ for an information request made under s 17 or under 17 or 17C of the TAA (see ¶1-590), on the day the right of inspection or the right of removal of the document is exercised by the Commissioner or by the officer of IR or by a later date agreed with the Commissioner ▪ for an information request made under s 17B or 17C (see ¶1590), by the date given in the request or the date that is 28 days after the date of the request, whichever is the later ▪ for an information request made under s 17H, 17J or 17K (see ¶1-590), by the date on which the Court requires the information to be produced  ▪ for an information request made under s 17I (see ¶1-590), by the date on which the Commissioner requires the information to be produced, and ▪ for an information request made under a discovery obligation, by the date by which the discovery obligation requires the disclosure of information. Treatment of document A document that is included in a request for information and that may possibly be subject to privilege as a tax advice document must be treated in a particular way. First, the document must be treated as being a tax advice document from the time of the request for, or discovery obligation for disclosure of, information until the time by which a claim for privilege must be made (see above) or until the time at which the Commissioner is notified that privilege will not be claimed, whichever is the earlier. If privilege is asserted, the document must be treated as a tax advice document from the time of the claim until: ▪ the District Court, the High Court or TRA rules that the document is not a tax advice document ▪ the person notifies the Commissioner that the document is not eligible to be a tax advice document for the person ▪ the person notifies the Commissioner that they withdraw the claim for privilege, or ▪ an approved advisor group informs the Commissioner that a tax advisor is not or was not a member of the approved advisor group at a time at which the tax advisor is claimed to be a member of the group and at which the tax advisor would be required to be a member of the group for the document to be a tax advice document. If a document must be treated as a tax advice document, a copy of the document must be held in a secure place by the tax advisor for  the periods of time referred to above. Attachments A document may include an attachment for which privilege cannot be claimed. Any person who receives an information request to disclose information in relation to another person must provide a copy of the attachment. This also applies for parts of an attachment. Information excluded from privilege Even if a tax advice document is privileged, certain information included in the document must still be disclosed in a statutory declaration in a prescribed form (form IR 520). This type of information is referred to as “tax contextual information” and, in broad terms, consists of: ▪ a fact or an assumption relating to a transaction that has occurred or is postulated by the person creating the tax advice document ▪ a description of a step involved in the performance of a transaction that has occurred or is postulated by the person creating the tax advice document ▪ non-tax advice (for example, valuation and investment advice) ▪ advice that concerns the tax implications of the Commissioner collecting debts owing to the Commissioner ▪ a fact or an assumption relating to advice on non-tax matters or collecting outstanding debts owed to the Commissioner ▪ a fact or an assumption from, or relating to, the preparation of the person’s financial statements, and ▪ a fact or an assumption from, or relating to, a document containing information that must be provided under an Inland Revenue Act.  The statutory declaration for the disclosure of tax contextual information must be made by a tax advisor who is not barred from making this type of statutory declaration (see below). Also, the declaration must state that the tax advisor is authorised to act on the relevant person’s behalf for the purposes of claiming privilege for a tax advice document. Excluded tax advisors A tax advisor can be barred from making a statutory declaration for the disclosure of tax contextual information if the advisor is convicted of an offence for: ▪ making a false statement or declaration under s 111 of the Crimes Act 1961 ▪ failing to provide tax information under s 143(1)(b) of the TAA ▪ knowingly failing to provide tax information or knowingly providing altered, false, incomplete or misleading tax information under s 143A(1)(b) or (c) ▪ knowingly failing to provide tax information or knowingly providing altered, false, incomplete or misleading tax information, with the intention to evade income tax or to obtain a refund under s 143B(1)(b) or (c), or ▪ obstruction under s 143H. Time limit Tax contextual information must be disclosed within a certain time. The time limits are summarised below: ▪ for an information request made under s 17 or under 17 or 17C of the TAA, by the date that is determined by the Commissioner ▪ for an information request made under s 17B or 17C and if the request is accompanied or followed by a request for the disclosure of a description of tax contextual information, by the date given by the Commissioner in the requirement to disclose  the description, or 28 days after the date of the requirement to disclose the description, whichever is the later ▪ for an information request made under s 17H, 17J or 17K, by the date that the court requires the information to be produced ▪ for an information request made under s 17I, by the date that the Commissioner requires the information to be produced, and ▪ for an information request made under a discovery obligation, by the date that the discovery obligation requires disclosure of information. Challenge The Commissioner or the person claiming privilege may apply to a District Court Judge, or to the court or TRA hearing the proceedings, for an order determining whether: ▪ a document is a tax advice document for the person ▪ information provided by the person is tax contextual information in relation to the document, and ▪ the person should provide a more detailed or better description of tax contextual information in relation to the document. Operational statement The Commissioner has released operational statement OS 18/02, “Non-disclosure right for tax advice documents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 106). This statement replaced the previous standard practice statement SPS 05/07. OS 18/02 sets out the process the Commissioner will follow when issuing a notice to a taxpayer, tax advisor and/or a third party requiring the disclosure of documents, which may contain tax advice and may be subject to the right to claim non-disclosure under ss 20B to 20G. It should be read in conjunction with operational statement OS 13/02, “Section 17 notices” (see ¶1-590).  Operational statement OS 18/02 applies to: ▪ information demands or discovery obligations issued on or after 1 July 2018 ▪ tax advisors who may or may not be chartered accountants, but are members of an approved advisory group. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 20B–20G  ¶1-604 Confidentiality of sensitive revenue information Introduction The law authorising the Commissioner to collect, inspect and use information relating to the affairs of taxpayers is contained in subpart 3A and sch 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Broadly, the structure of subpart 3A is: ▪ purposes and principles of the subpart: ss 16–16C (see ¶1-590) ▪ collection and use of information by Commissioner: ss 17–17M (see ¶1-590) ▪ confidentiality of sensitive revenue information: ss 18 and 18B ▪ permitted disclosures of sensitive revenue information: ss 18C– 18J. Subpart 3A and sch 7 took effect on 18 March 2019. These provisions are former ss 16–21BA and Pt 4 of the TAA in redrafted form. The redrafting exercise was undertaken to make the legislation clearer and easier to use. Only a few deliberate policy changes were made. One example of a deliberate policy change is s 18, which narrows the ambit of the confidentiality rule from its coverage of all matters relating to the Inland Revenue Acts so as to more clearly target information about taxpayers. The Commissioner’s power to collect and use information relating to taxpayers is discussed at ¶1-590.  The main confidentiality rules binding Inland Revenue (IR) officers now appear in ss 18–18J, with more detailed provisions (concerning exceptions to secrecy) located in sch 7. Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 53 has a useful table comparing both repealed and current disclosure provisions. The redrafted confidentiality rules are discussed in the commentary that follows. The relevant provisions are: ▪ s 18D (disclosure carrying into effect a revenue law) — see ¶1606 ▪ s 18E (information-sharing arrangements) — see ¶1-609 ▪ s 18F (regulations for sharing information for public services purpose) — see ¶1-615 ▪ s 18G (disclosure to a person or their representative) — see ¶1618 ▪ s 18H (disclosure to other agencies) — see ¶1-622–¶1-634 ▪ s 18I (disclosure for international purposes) — see ¶1-636 ▪ s 18J (disclosure for risk of harm purposes) — see ¶1-638 ▪ s 18K (disclosure when funds of gift-exempt body are misapplied) — see ¶1-640. For a discussion of the provisions applying before 18 March 2019, see CCH, 2019 New Zealand Master Tax Guide. Confidentiality rule Information is critical to IR’s ability to deliver services. Much of that information is provided by taxpayers. This may be information about themselves (such as in an individual or business income tax return) or about other taxpayers (such as employee income information). For taxpayers to be comfortable providing their information, they need to feel the information requested is reasonable and is treated  appropriately by IR. This assurance is given by the confidentiality rule, often referred to as the “tax secrecy” rule, set out in s 18 of the TAA (previously in former s 81). As stated above, a key policy change with the redrafted provisions is that s 18 has narrowed the confidentiality rule from its previous coverage of all matters relating to the Inland Revenue Acts, to more clearly target information about taxpayers by referring to “sensitive revenue information” (see below). A revenue officer must keep all sensitive revenue information confidential and must not disclose it unless the disclosure is a permitted disclosure under ss 18D–18J: s 18(1). Permitted disclosures are exceptions to the confidentiality rule in s 18: s 18C. However, note that despite the permitted disclosures, the Commissioner is not required to disclose any item of revenue information if its release would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system or would prejudice the maintenance of the law: s 18(3). A person, other than a revenue officer, must keep sensitive revenue information confidential unless the disclosure is: ▪ a permitted disclosure ▪ authorised by the Commissioner for a purpose, or ▪ permitted under the agreement by which the information is accessed or obtained: s 18(2). A number of offences apply to those revenue officers or other persons breaching the confidentiality rule: see ss 143C–143EB and ¶14-300. Key terms “Revenue information” is defined as information that is acquired, obtained, accessed, received by, disclosed to, or held by the Commissioner under or for the purposes of a revenue law or under an information-sharing agreement: s 16C(2). “Sensitive revenue information” is defined in s 16C(3) as meaning:  ▪ revenue information that relates to the affairs of a person or entity— □ that identifies, or is reasonably capable of being used to identify, the person or entity, whether directly or indirectly □ that might reasonably be regarded as private, commercially sensitive, or otherwise confidential or □ the release of which could result in loss, harm or prejudice to a person to whom or to which it relates ▪ but does not include aggregate or statistical data that may contain information about the person or entity to the extent to which the information does not meet the requirements of the above. A “revenue officer” is a person employed in or seconded to IR and any person formerly so employed or seconded. The definition also includes a person employed by the Government of an overseas country or territory and who is seconded to IR. Confidentiality declaration Revenue officers must complete a declaration of confidentiality before they begin their official duties. The declaration may be made before the Commissioner, another revenue officer or a person authorised to take statutory declarations. Similarly, other persons who acquire, obtain or have access to revenue information must complete a certificate of confidentiality prescribed by the Commissioner. The certificate must be kept by the person, entity or agency that employs or engages the services of the person holding the information in a form acceptable to the Commissioner. Revenue officers and other persons bound by undertakings given under earlier confidentiality provisions corresponding to s 18B are treated as having made a declaration, or given a certificate, under that section.  Law: TAA ss 16B(4), 16C, 18, 18B, 18C  ¶1-606 Permitted disclosures made in carrying into effect revenue laws Carrying into effect a revenue law Section 18D(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) permits the disclosure of “sensitive revenue information” (see ¶1-604) if the disclosure is made for the purpose of carrying into effect a revenue law as set out in sch 7, pt A. Before 18 March 2019, most of the categories of disclosure listed in sch 7, pt A were listed in former s 81(4). The categories included in sch 7, pt A can be summarised as follows: Tax advisors, tax agents and representatives The Commissioner may supply information to an approved advisor group about an action or omission by a person who is, or purports to be, a member of that group and that the Commissioner considers to be a breach of a member’s responsibilities under the privilege rules for tax advisers (see ¶1-600). The Commissioner may also supply information about a person to an association or group if the person is, or purports to be, a member of the association or group as a person in the business of preparing tax returns for other people and the information is, or would be, relevant to the Commissioner’s decision to remove the person from, or refuse to add the person to, the list of tax agents. This applies when the members of the association or group are subject to a professional code of conduct and a disciplinary process to enforce that code. With effect from 23 March 2020, this clause is also extended to representatives (s 124D), or people purporting to be representatives. See sch 7, cl 3. Misappropriation of money The Commissioner may communicate:  ▪ such information as is necessary for the purpose of any prosecution under the laws of New Zealand or of any other country, or ▪ such information as the Commissioner considers desirable for the purpose of any investigation into any suspected offence being a prosecution or investigation in relation to any actual or attempted misappropriation by any person in respect of money: ▪ payable by Inland Revenue (IR) to another person, or ▪ entrusted to that person for payment to IR. However, no such communication can be made in respect of any person to whom such money was payable or entrusted unless that person or that person’s legal representative consents to the communication. In the case of a company, an authorised officer must consent to the communication. See sch 7, cl 4. Offences under the Crimes Act The Commissioner may divulge or communicate any matter or thing or produce in any court any document the Commissioner considers desirable for the purposes of any investigation into any suspected offence or prosecution under the Crimes Act 1961 in relation to any tax imposed or payable or any refund made or claimed under the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. See sch 7, cl 5. Civil recovery action The Commissioner may communicate any information to any authorised person (as defined in s 98(1) of the Criminal Proceeds (Recovery) Act 2009) any information required for the purpose of establishing whether a prima facie case exists for taking civil recovery action. See sch 7, cl 6.  Offences under revenue laws The Commissioner may: ▪ divulge or communicate any matter or thing to the Director of the Serious Fraud Office, or ▪ produce in any court any document that the Commissioner considers desirable for the purposes of any investigation or prosecution in relation to any suspected offence against the Inland Revenue Acts. See sch 7, cl 7. ▸ Note: The repeal of cl 7 of sch 7 has been enacted to avoid conflicting legislation with the serious crime approved information sharing agreement between Inland Revenue and the New Zealand Police that is currently being extended to include the Serious Fraud Office and New Zealand Customs Service. However, the repeal will not come into force until a date that is set by Order in Council. Child support: arrival and departure information The Commissioner may communicate to a member, employer or agent of the New Zealand Customs Service authorised to receive it, information that relates to a person liable to pay financial support under the Child Support Act 1991 and that the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose and is reasonably necessary for the purposes of ss 307 and 313 of the Customs and Excise Act 2018 (ie to assist the Commissioner in locating persons in serious default of child support). See sch 7, cl 8. Student loans Nothing prevents the Commissioner from disclosing to another authorised person any information for the purpose of verifying any declaration made by an applicant for a student loan as to any unpaid amounts owed by the applicant where the declaration is a condition  of obtaining the loan. For these purposes, an “authorised person” means: ▪ the Commissioner, or revenue officer authorised by the Commissioner ▪ the chief executive of the Ministry of Social Development, or an officer of the Ministry authorised by the chief executive ▪ an employee of a tertiary institution authorised by the chief executive ▪ the Secretary of Education, or an officer of the Ministry of Education authorised by the Secretary, or ▪ the loan manager, or an employee of the loan manager authorised by the chief executive. The Commissioner may provide certain information on student loan borrowers to the chief executive of the New Zealand Customs Service to verify their status and to locate borrowers who are in serious default on their student loans when they enter or leave New Zealand. See ¶8-095. The Commissioner may also provide information to a contact person for a borrower if required to enable the contact person to provide current address details for the borrower. The Commissioner may provide information on borrowers to the Australian Taxation Office to verify details of overseas-based borrowers and administer the student loan scheme for those borrowers. See ¶8-097. See sch 7, cl 9. Data processing The Commissioner may communicate to any officer, employee or agent of any of the State Services any information relating to the processing of data or any other matter necessary for the effective administration of the Inland Revenue Acts.  See sch 7, cl 10. Services necessary for effective administration of revenue laws The Commissioner may provide necessary information to persons contracted to perform services, eg consultants. See sch 7, cl 11. Residential land withholding tax The Commissioner may provide to a relevant professional body appropriate details of a failure by one of its members to satisfy, as agent, a person’s liability to pay Resident Land Withholding Tax (RLWT) in accordance with the RLWT rules. See sch 7, cl 12. Publishing certain items The confidentiality rule in s 18 does not prevent the Commissioner from publishing a product ruling. See sch 7, cl 13. Publication of details related to COVID-19 resurgence support payments (CRSP) scheme The Commissioner may publish information relating to the CRSP scheme (see ¶5-765) for up to two years. The Commissioner’s policy is that only the name of the recipient of the grant, the amount paid, and the period of alert level escalation for which the payment relates will be published. However, these details will not be published if the recipient has fewer than 3 employees or the amount paid has been capped on the basis of being four times the declared revenue decline. See sch 7, cl 13B. Carrying out a function conferred on the Commissioner There is a permitted disclosure under s 18D(2) when disclosure of sensitive revenue information is made in carrying out or supporting a function lawfully conferred on the Commissioner to: ▪ administer the tax system  ▪ implement the tax system, or ▪ improve, research or reform the tax system, and the Commissioner considers the disclosure is reasonable for these purposes, having regard to: ▪ the Commissioner’s obligation at all times to use best endeavours to protect the integrity of the tax system ▪ the importance of promoting compliance with the law, especially voluntary compliance ▪ the impact of the disclosure, personally or commercially or in some other way ▪ the resources available to the Commissioner, and ▪ the public availability of the information. In January 2012, IR released standard practice statement SPS 11/07, “Application of discretion in s 81(1B) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 — the secrecy provisions” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 1, February 2012 at 3). The standard practice statement provides guidance to IR staff as to when the former s 81(1B) (now s 18D(2)), might result in IR disclosing such information, and outlines the steps IR will take before making that disclosure to ensure maximum consistency. The statement also briefly examines how the provision interacts with the other exceptions to the secrecy provisions. ▸ Note: IR has released a draft standard practice statement, ED0210, “Application of discretion in section 18D(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 – an exception to confidentiality”. The draft item sets out the Commissioner’s practice regarding the confidentiality rule in s 18D(2), previously contained in former s 81(1B) of the TAA. The draft statement updates the earlier statement for the legislative change and will replace SPS 11/07 once finalised.  Disclosures in co-located environments Under s 18D(3), a permitted disclosure exists when a revenue officer discloses sensitive revenue information: ▪ to another revenue officer, or a person who is not a revenue officer but who acquires revenue information and who has completed a certificate of confidentiality ▪ disclosure is made at a place, and in conditions relating to the confidentiality of information, where revenue officers are expected to perform their duties, and ▪ the revenue officer does not intend the person receiving the information to receive it and has taken care that is reasonable in the circumstances to prevent the disclosure. The objective is to relieve revenue officers (and others) working in close proximity to persons employed by other government agencies from liability for the inadvertent disclosure of taxpayer information. The conditions of the co-location work environment will need to be taken into account in determining what level of care is reasonable. Disclosures for court proceedings Sensitive revenue information may be disclosed to a court or tribunal if disclosure is necessary for the purpose of carrying into effect a revenue law: s 18D(4)(a). Secondly, the confidentiality rule in s 18 does not require a revenue officer to produce a document in a court or tribunal, or disclose to a court or tribunal any matter or thing coming to the officer’s notice in the performance of his or her duties: s 18D(4)(b). The question of disclosure in court proceedings may arise in relation to the discovery of documents by the Commissioner under the High Court Rules; see Westpac Banking Corp Ltd v C of IR, ANZ National Bank Ltd v C of IR (2008) 23 NZTC 21,896 (SC). The Supreme Court noted that the exception to the Commissioner’s obligation of secrecy applies where the Commissioner chooses to  use secret tax material to support a case in litigation. However, the secret material must be reasonably necessary for the purposes of the litigation in which the Commissioner proposes its disclosure. If the threshold is met, techniques of editing and redaction should be pursued where that does not impair the utility of the material concerned. It would seem that disclosure is prohibited in proceedings that do not directly involve IR. See R v Saint-Merat [1958] NZLR 1147. It would also seem that information that has been requested by an accused in criminal proceedings is privileged if the disclosure is not necessary for carrying out the duties of IR. See Daemar v Gilliand [1979] 2 NZLR 7. See also Burt v Darwin (1986) 8 NZTC 5,026. In R v Morris (2005) 22 NZTC 19,217, the first witness for the prosecution was an investigations officer employed by IR. Counsel for the respondent objected to the proposed evidence on the grounds that the officer giving it would infringe the confidentiality rule. The Court of Appeal held that provided that the IR officer’s proposed evidence was admissible under the general law, he was not prevented from giving that evidence by the confidentiality rule, because his purpose in giving the evidence was to carry into effect the TAA. In addition, it was irrelevant that in that case the alleged fraud on the Revenue had been charged under the Crimes Act rather than an Inland Revenue Act. Litigation against officers The Court of Appeal has ordered IR to disclose information it was seeking to keep confidential under the secrecy provisions of the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 (now found in the TAA). In Knight v Barnett (1991) 13 NZTC 8,014, the court noted it seemed quite wrong for IR, in litigation against its officers for misconduct and abuse of power, to claim the benefit of secrecy provisions. The Court of Appeal also noted the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 strengthened this conclusion that, subject to the question of public interest immunity, the Commissioner should comply with the ordinary obligations of a litigant to make discovery of relevant documents. Therefore, it would seem the question of whether disclosure is  required will turn on the necessity for the production of the document as defined in s 3(1) of the TAA, for the purposes of carrying into effect any of the Inland Revenue Acts. Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18D, sch 7 pt A  ¶1-609 Permitted disclosures made under informationsharing arrangements The confidentiality rule in s 18 does not apply to the disclosure of “sensitive revenue information” (see ¶1-604), and other information, if the disclosure is made under: ▪ an approved information-sharing agreement under s 145 of the Privacy Act 2020 (before 1 December 2020, s 96J of the Privacy Act 1993): s 18E(2) ▪ an agreement to share information for public service purposes when disclosure occurs with the consent of the person to whom the information relates: s 18E(3), or ▪ regulations authorised by s 18F (see ¶1-615). Approved information-sharing agreements Section 145 of the Privacy Act 2020 (before 1 December 2020, s 96J of the Privacy Act 1993) allows the Governor-General to approve an information-sharing agreement made by Order in Council on the recommendation of a government Minister. The information-sharing agreement may relate to information that is sensitive revenue information, whether personal or non-personal information. For this purpose, an approved information-sharing agreement may extend a restricted information-sharing provision in an Inland Revenue Act. Inland Revenue has concluded several information-sharing agreements that have been approved by the following Orders in Council:  ▪ before 1 October 2020, the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement between Inland Revenue and New Zealand Police) Order 2014 as amended in March 2015 and July 2017 — which allowed IR to share personal information with the New Zealand Police for the prevention, detection, investigation of, or use as evidence of, a serious crime. Note that this agreement was revoked from 1 October 2020 by the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Between Inland Revenue, New Zealand Police, New Zealand Customs Service, and Serious Fraud Office) Order 2020, see below. ▪ the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Between Inland Revenue and Internal Affairs) Order 2018 — which allows Internal Affairs to share information it gathers as part of the passport application process with IR for the purposes of locating overseas-based student loan borrowers and child support liable parents living overseas who are in default of their repayment and contact obligations. ▪ the Tax Administration (Information Sharing with Accident Compensation Corporation) Order 2015 — which allows IR to communicate information relating to assessing levies and to assessing eligibility for, and calculating of, earnings-related compensation. ▪ the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement between Inland Revenue and Ministry of Social Development) Order 2017 — which enables the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) and IR to share information for the purposes of assessing eligibility for benefits, enforcing obligations related to benefits, assessing tax obligations and registering new customers or updating customer contact information. ▪ from 1 October 2020, the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Between Inland Revenue, New Zealand Police, New Zealand Customs Service, and Serious Fraud Office) Order 2020 — which allows Inland Revenue to share personal information with the participating agencies for the purposes of  the prevention, detection, or investigation of, or use as evidence in the prosecution of, a serious crime. This Order revoked the 2014 agreement with the New Zealand Police. Schedule 7 cl 45 also provides that the Commissioner may exchange information with the MSD for the purpose of giving assistance to the government of a country with which New Zealand has a social security agreement. See ¶1-633. Disclosures made with taxpayer’s consent The Commissioner may enter an agreement to share certain information if the agreement: ▪ is made for public services purposes ▪ relates to the disclosure of sensitive revenue information held about a person or entity ▪ specifies appropriate conditions for the security and use of the information, and ▪ stipulates a process to ensure the consent is properly obtained and recorded. In addition, the Privacy Commissioner, after consultation, must agree the disclosure is appropriate, and the person or entity must consent to the disclosure. “Public service” is defined as a public function or duty imposed on an agency by law or government policy. An agency (for ss 18E and 18F) is defined in s 138 of the Privacy Act 2020 (before 1 December 2020, s 2 of the Privacy Act 1993) and means a New Zealand private sector agency (non-government agency) or a public sector agency (a department, organisation or local authority). Provenance inquiry The Commissioner must undertake a provenance inquiry before proposing a new information-sharing agreement, a new consent agreement or new regulations for public service purposes. The  inquiry must assess the likely provenance (origin) of the data it is proposed will be shared. Consideration must also be given to whether conditions are required for security and use of the information. Note that s 95(1) of the Privacy Act requires any person bound by a secrecy obligation imposed under any enactment to supply information or documents sought, or answer questions posed, by the Privacy Commissioner. Compliance with such a request by the Privacy Commissioner is not a breach of the secrecy obligation to which the person is subject. Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18E, sch 7 cl 45  ¶1-615 Permitted disclosures under regulations for information-sharing for public services purposes Section 18F of the Tax Administration Act allows regulations to be made by Order in Council authorising revenue information and other information to be shared in the context of providing public services. Section 18F applies when: ▪ sharing of the information is intended to improve the government’s ability to deliver efficient and effective services or enforce the law ▪ the information is more easily or more efficiently obtained from, or verified by, the Commissioner ▪ it is not unreasonable or impractical to require the Commissioner to deliver the information ▪ the nature of the sharing is proportionate, taking into account the purpose of the proposed sharing ▪ the agency or other recipient of the information has adequate protection in place for it, and  ▪ sharing will not unduly inhibit the future provision of information to the Commissioner. An Order in Council may be made issuing regulations for the sharing of revenue information that the Commissioner holds with an agency. The regulations may prescribe the types of revenue information to be shared, how it is to be provided, accessed and used, and how it is to be stored, protected or disposed of. The regulations must also provide for monitoring by the Privacy Commissioner and specify whether further disclosure of the information is permitted and whether review requirements are to be stipulated. As a further safeguard, before recommending that the regulations should be made, the Minister of Revenue must be satisfied that: ▪ the regulations are necessary to achieve the criteria listed above ▪ the type and quantity of information is no more than is necessary to facilitate the objective of efficiency or law enforcement ▪ the privacy of individuals is not unreasonably impinged and adequate privacy safeguards will apply ▪ the information-sharing mechanism proposed is the most appropriate one, and ▪ there has been a consultative process (with a minimum of four weeks consultation period). The former s 81BA of the TAA contained similar provisions (although those provisions only authorised the Commissioner to disclose information to government agencies, rather than the new wider sharing for public services). An Order in Council made under s 81BA is treated as a regulation made under s 18F, to the extent that the order remains in force. Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18F  ¶1-618 Permitted disclosures to persons and their representatives The disclosure of sensitive revenue information to a person in relation to whom the information is held (or to that person’s representative) is a permitted disclosure and so not subject to the confidentiality requirement in s 18: s 18G. Detailed rules for this form of disclosure appear in sch 7, pt B. The categories of disclosure in sch 7, pt B can be summarised as follows: Persons in relation to whom information is held and their representatives The Commissioner may permit copies of, or details of or from, any document or information in the possession of, or obtained by or on behalf of, the Commissioner to be given to the person from whom, or on behalf of whom, or in relation to whom, such document or information is held or was obtained, or the legal personal representative or agent of such person. The Commissioner must be satisfied that the information is readily available in IR and must consider it reasonable and practicable to give the information. For these purposes, “legal personal representative” means the executor or administrator of a deceased person, or any person who, by court order, has been appointed guardian or manager of the estate of any person or administers such an estate. See sch 7, cl 15. Third-party providers The Commissioner may provide information received from, or in relation to, a third-party provider to the person to whom the information relates in the following situations: Tax agent The Commissioner may communicate to a taxpayer who has chosen to have his or her returns prepared by a tax agent:  ▪ whether the tax agent is a listed tax agent (see ¶2-018) ▪ any decision of the Commissioner refusing to list the tax agent or removing the tax agent from the list. Tax pooling intermediary Where a tax pooling intermediary has made a deposit to a tax pooling account on behalf of a person, the Commissioner may give the details of the deposit to that person. Representative or nominated person When a person has another person acting on their behalf as either a representative or nominated person, the Commissioner may communicate to the person: ▪ whether approval of the other person’s status as a representative is disallowed ▪ whether the other person’s status as a nominated person is disallowed ▪ a decision of the Commissioner refusing to approve, or disallowing, the other person’s status. PAYE intermediary The Commissioner may communicate the revocation of a PAYE intermediary’s approval to an employer for whom the PAYE intermediary is acting. Approved AIM provider The Commissioner may communicate the revocation of an approved AIM provider’s approval to a person who uses the software provided by that provider. RWT proxy The Commissioner may communicate the breach of the requirements to be an RWT proxy to a person for whom the RWT proxy is acting.  See sch 7, cl 16. Software clients The Commissioner may communicate information relating to a person (the software client) who uses an accepted software package to communicate information to, and receive information from, the Commissioner: ▪ to a person, or an employee or agent of a person, who maintains the accepted software package for the software client, and ▪ as a consequence of communicating the information to the software client using the accepted software package. See sch 7, cl 17. Digital services providers The Commissioner may communicate information about a person to an accepted provider of digital services when the person uses the digital services to communicate with the Commissioner and the disclosure is a consequence of that communication. See sch 7, cl 18. Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18G, sch 7 pt B  ¶1-622 Permitted disclosures to agencies for certain purposes Section 18H of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) removes the restriction on disclosure of sensitive revenue information by the Commissioner when disclosure is made to an agency referred to, and for a purpose specified in, sch 7, pt C of the TAA. A disclosure made in these circumstances is a permitted disclosure: s 18C. Part C has two subparts. Subpart 1 (cl 20–39) deals with disclosures to certain agencies and subpart 2 (cl 41–46) refers to disclosures under an exchange of information.  Permitted disclosures under an exchange of information allowed under subpart 2 are discussed in the following commentary: ▪ The Accident Compensation Corporation — earnings-related payments and levies (¶1-627) ▪ The Ministry of Justice — fines defaulter information (¶1-629) ▪ The Ministry of Justice or the New Zealand Police — child support exemption (¶1-631) ▪ Work and Income — foreign social security agreement (¶1-633) ▪ Work and Income — parental leave payments (¶1-634). Permitted disclosures to certain agencies allowed under subpart 1 are summarised below. Statistics New Zealand The Commissioner may communicate to an employee of the Statistics Department any information: ▪ the person is authorised to receive ▪ the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose, and ▪ the disclosure of which is made for the purposes of the Statistics Act 1975. See sch 7, cl 20. The Treasury The Commissioner may communicate to an employee of the Treasury any information: ▪ the employee is authorised to receive, and ▪ the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose and is essential to the preparation of taxation revenue forecasts.  See sch 7, cl 21. Intelligence and security agencies The Commissioner may allow the Director-General of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service or the Government Communications Security Bureau (or an authorised employee of those agencies) access to information specified in a permission given under ss 137 or 138 of the Intelligence and Security Act 2017. Broadly, access may be granted if certain criteria based on New Zealand’s national security, international relations or economic wellbeing are satisfied. See sch 7, cl 22. Government agencies — AML/CFT purposes The Commissioner may disclose to a government agency, or an AML/CFT supervisor, information supplied or obtained under the Income Tax Act 2007, the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 or the Tax Administration Act 1994 if disclosure is necessary or desirable to ensure compliance with the AML/CFT legislation. An AML/CFT supervisor is defined in s 5 of the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009. These persons are the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Financial Markets Authority and the Department of Internal Affairs. See sch 7, cl 23. Government agencies — COVID-19 response purposes The Commissioner may disclose to a government agency information about a person or entity for the purpose of enabling the government agency to respond to the COVID-19 virus outbreak. For these purposes, a government agency is defined as a government department (named in Part 1 of sch 2 of the Public Service Act 2020 (previously, sch 1 to the State Sector Act 1988)), the New Zealand Police, the Accident Compensation Corporation, Kāinga Ora – Homes and Communities, and (from 1 July 2020) Callaghan Innovation. The provision only applies for a two-year period from 17 March 2020, unless extended by an Order in Council, and the Commissioner may only disclose the information if the  Commissioner considers the information is readily available, it is reasonable and practicable, and not undesirable, to disclose it, and the information is reasonably necessary for the purpose specified. See sch 7, cl 23B. New Zealand Customs Service — value of imported goods The Commissioner may disclose to the New Zealand Customs Service information for the purpose of assessing the suitability of an arrangement relating to the use of provisional values under the Customs and Excise Act 2018. See sch 7, cl 24. Business, Innovation and Employment — New Zealand business number The Commissioner may communicate primary business data to authorised officers of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for inclusion in the New Zealand Business Number Register. A New Zealand business number is a unique identifier for use by a business in all its dealings with the government. Primary business data includes the business’s trading name, address, type of entity, status and other information, including any Australian business number. Information necessary to correct the business register may also be communicated. See sch 7, cl 25. Agencies for workplace safety The Commissioner may communicate to an officer or employee of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, WorkSafe New Zealand, or a designated agency under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 (eg a government department or a Crown entity with specialised knowledge) information: ▪ the person is authorised to receive, and ▪ the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose and is reasonably necessary to enable the performance of the person’s duties relating to workplace legislation.  See sch 7, cl 26. Agencies for charities regulation The Commissioner may communicate to a member, employee or agent of the Charities Registration Board, or the chief executive, any information: ▪ the person is authorised to receive, and ▪ the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose and is reasonably necessary to enable the performance of the person’s duties relating to the exercise of the powers of the Board. See sch 7, cl 27. Agencies for foreign trusts regulation The Commissioner may communicate to an officer, employee or agent of the Department of Internal Affairs or the New Zealand Police any information relating to the registration (or absence of registration) for a foreign trust that the person is authorised to receive. See sch 7, cl 28. Government agencies — voice recognition analysis The Commissioner may disclose information to an authorised officer or employee of a public sector agency if the information relates to the voice identification of a person that is used to identify that person, it is held and communicated for identity verification purposes and the Minister of Revenue is notified that the information will be communicated to the public sector agency. Public sector agencies are defined in s 138 of the Privacy Act 2020 (before 1 December 2020, s 2 of the Privacy Act 1993) and mean a department, an organisation, or a local authority. See sch 7, cl 29. Financial Markets Authority — KiwiSaver information The Commissioner may communicate certain information to the Financial Markets Authority (FMA) relating to KiwiSaver schemes or  complying superannuation funds and their members, provided the Commissioner considers it not undesirable to disclose the information and the information is reasonably necessary to enable the FMA to perform its duties or functions or exercise its powers. See sch 7, cl 30. Land Information New Zealand The Commissioner may communicate information to the chief executive or an authorised employee of Land Information New Zealand relating to the tax statements required under the Land Transfer Act (see s 86 of the Land Transfer Act 2017). See sch 7, cl 31. Registrars of courts Upon request by a Registrar of a court, the Commissioner must supply the name, address and telephone number of the employer of a person who is the subject of an attachment order (see s 104A of the Summary Proceedings Act 1957). See sch 7, cl 32. Credit reporting agencies The Commissioner may disclose tax debt information for serious cases of non-compliance to credit reporting agencies. See further at ¶1-624. See sch 7, cl 33. Agencies for gambling levy The Commissioner may communicate to any employee of the Department of Internal Affairs or the Ministry of Health information that: ▪ the employee is authorised to receive, and ▪ the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose and is essential to enable the employee to carry out any duty lawfully conferred on the person relating to the determination of the problem gambling levy rate.  See sch 7, cl 34. Department of Internal Affairs: offshore betting charges The Commissioner may communicate information to a person who is an employee of the Department of Internal Affairs that: ▪ the person is authorised by the department to receive, and ▪ the Commissioner considers is not undesirable to disclose and is essential to enable the person to carry out any duty lawfully conferred on the person relating to offshore betting charges payable under the Racing Industry Act 2020 and liable for GST. See sch 7, cl 34A. NZ Film Commission — government screen production payments The Commissioner may disclose information to an officer, employee or agent of the New Zealand Film Commission for the purposes of enabling the entitlement of a company to a government screen production payment (see ¶10-446). See sch 7, cl 35. Registrar of Companies — offences under Companies Act 1993 The Commissioner may disclose to the Registrar of Companies information concerning possible offences under certain provisions of the Companies Act 1993. See further at ¶1-625. See sch 7, cl 36. KiwiSaver providers — KiwiSaver details The Commissioner and a KiwiSaver scheme provider may communicate to each other a person’s name, date of birth, tax file number, contact information and information relating to a person’s transfer from one scheme to another for the purposes of administering the KiwiSaver Act 2006 or a KiwiSaver scheme. See s 220B of the KiwiSaver Act 2006. See sch 7, cl 37.  Agencies for research and development The Commissioner may communicate to officers, employees or agents of the Treasury, Callaghan Innovation, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) or a state sector entity responsible for any function related to research and development advice or incentives, information reasonably necessary for the person to perform their work in relation to evaluating, administering, statistical reporting on, and policy formation for, tax credits provided in subparts LY and MX of the Income Tax Act 2007. Information may also be communicated to officers, employees or agents of Callaghan Innovation or MBIE if it is reasonably necessary for the person to perform their work in relation to: ▪ offering research and development advice and incentives, including tax incentives, grants, loans, and any related measures aimed at incentivising R&D, or ▪ the grant and administration of a loan made under the research and development loan scheme established by Ministerial direction to Callaghan Innovation under s 112 of the Crown Entities Act 2004, notice number 2020-go2811. See sch 7, cl 38. Agencies for Australian wine producer rebate The exchange of information is permitted between the Commissioner, the New Zealand Customs Service and the Australian Taxation Office in relation to the approval or verification of the entitlement of a New Zealand wine producer to the Australian wine producer rebate. See sch 7, cl 39. Regulator under the Overseas Investment Act 2005 The Commissioner may disclose sensitive revenue information to any authorised officer or employee of the regulator under the Overseas Investment Act 2005 (OIA) if the regulator has reasonable grounds to believe disclosure of the information is necessary for  determining if an investor meets the investor test under the OIA, for managing national security and public order risks associated with transactions by overseas persons, or for any purpose set out in s 41(1A) of the OIA. The Commissioner may disclose the information only where it is reasonable and practical to do so, the information is readily available, and it is not undesirable to disclose it. See sch 7, cl 39B. Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18H, sch 7 pt C  ¶1-624 Permitted disclosure: approved credit reporting agency The Commissioner may disclose details of a taxpayer’s unpaid tax to an approved credit reporting agency. In broad terms, disclosure is permitted when the tax debt exceeds $150,000, it is not the subject of a tax dispute and the Commissioner has given the taxpayer 30 days’ notice of the proposed disclosure. Tax information that the Commissioner will disclose comprises: ▪ the tax type — GST, income tax and employer deductions required to be made under the PAYE rules ▪ the total dollar amount of debt, per tax type, and ▪ the oldest debt period, per tax type. The only credit reporting agency currently approved is Centrix. The existence of any instalment arrangement reached with Inland Revenue (IR) will also be disclosed. Information disclosure will continue until the tax debt is resolved in full. While the provision includes all taxpayers, currently the practical effect is that it is limited to non-natural persons, such as registered New Zealand companies. This is because personal information about individuals is regulated by the Credit Reporting Privacy Code of Practice (enabled by the Privacy Act). This code currently prevents credit reporters from receiving tax information about  individuals. The government intends to apply the provision to all taxpayers and officials will work with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner on the interaction of the provision and the Credit Reporting Privacy Code of Practice. Details of a taxpayer’s unpaid tax may be communicated to allow a credit reporting agency to include information in the taxpayer’s credit report. Disclosure is also permitted to evidence and maintain the accuracy of the report (eg updates on changes in the amount of unpaid tax may be given). Disclosure criteria The Commissioner may disclose taxpayer information to an approved credit reporting agency when: ▪ the taxpayer has an amount of reportable unpaid tax ▪ the Commissioner has formally notified the taxpayer of the unpaid tax and of the intention to effect disclosure ▪ the Commissioner has made reasonable efforts to recover the reportable unpaid tax, and ▪ 30 days after the date formal notification is given to the taxpayer: □ the reportable unpaid tax is greater than $150,000 (being the amount fixed by the Taxation (Disclosure of Information to Approved Credit Reporting Agencies) Regulations 2017), or □ reportable unpaid tax has been outstanding for a year and, in the Commissioner’s judgment, the proportion of the unpaid amount to the taxpayer’s assessable income for the year is 30% or more. Reportable unpaid tax is unpaid tax resulting from liability for (or excess refunds of) income tax, GST, deductions required by the PAYE rules, student loan scheme deductions, child support deductions, ESCT, RSCT, tax credits under Pt L (other than working for families tax credits), and use of money interest and civil penalties  on such reportable unpaid tax. It does not include unpaid tax subject to a dispute or challenge under the Tax Administration Act (TAA) or tax for which the Commissioner has entered into an instalment arrangement after a request by the taxpayer. (Note that it is not sufficient for the taxpayer to merely request such an arrangement.) 12-month rule The Commissioner may also disclose details of a taxpayer’s unpaid tax to a credit reporting agency if: ▪ the Commissioner gives formal notification to the taxpayer that disclosure of unpaid tax may occur (“the current notification”) ▪ the current notification is the third formal notification given to the taxpayer in 12 months ▪ neither of the two earlier notifications resulted in a disclosure to a credit reporting agency because the taxpayer paid a portion of the unpaid tax, and ▪ the Commissioner has made reasonable efforts to recover unpaid tax from the taxpayer before the current notification. In this situation, disclosure may be made even if the amount of unpaid tax is less than the prescribed financial thresholds. Instalment arrangements Some provision is made for taxpayers seeking to make instalment arrangements. Information concerning a taxpayer’s unpaid tax cannot be disclosed to a credit reporting agency until the Commissioner has completed considering an application to remit tax or a penalty under ss 177 or 183H of the TAA. This restriction applies to applications for relief made in the 30-day period after formal notification of the intention to disclose has been given to the taxpayer. Publication The Commissioner must publish the following details on an annual basis for the previous tax year:  ▪ the number of taxpayers formally notified ▪ the number of taxpayers whose information was disclosed to an approved credit reporting agency, and ▪ the number of taxpayers who paid their reportable unpaid tax in full after being formally notified and having their tax data disclosed. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7, Pt C, cl 33  ¶1-625 Permitted disclosure: suspected offences under Companies Act 1993 The Commissioner may pass information to the Registrar of Companies concerning offences under certain provisions of the Companies Act 1993. The information may be communicated if the Commissioner or the Registrar reasonably suspects that: ▪ an offence under ss 138(1), 377, 382(4), 383(6), 385(9), 385AA(9) or 386A(2) of the Companies Act 1993 has been, is being, or will be committed, and ▪ the information is relevant for the purposes of preventing, detecting, investigating or providing evidence of, the offence. The Commissioner must also be satisfied that the information is readily available, it is reasonable and practicable to communicate the information and that communication of the information is in the public interest. The relevant offences, all of which carry a penalty of a fine of up to $200,000 or up to five years’ imprisonment, are the following: ▪ serious breach of a director’s duty to act in good faith and in best interests of company ▪ a person making or authorising false statements  ▪ breach of statutory prohibition from managing or being a director, or promoter, of a company ▪ breach of a court order disqualifying a person from managing or being a director, or promoter, of a company ▪ breach of notice from Registrar or Financial Markets Authority prohibiting a person’s involvement as a director, or promoter, of a company, or of managing a company, and ▪ director of a failed company being a director or promoter of, or managing, a phoenix company. A “phoenix company”, in relation to a failed company, is a company that, at any time before or within five years after the commencement of the liquidation of the failed company, is known by a pre-liquidation name of the failed company or a similar name: s 386B of the Companies Act 1993. “Pre-liquidation name” is any name, including a trading name, by which the failed company was known in the 12 months before commencement of its liquidation. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7, Pt C, cl 36; C93 ss 138(1), 377, 382(4), 383(6), 385(9), 385AA(9), 386A(2), 386B  ¶1-627 Permitted disclosure: Accident Compensation Corporation Earnings-related compensation Information may be exchanged between Inland Revenue (IR) and the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) for compensation or levy purposes: sch 7, pt C, cl 41 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The range of information that may be exchanged between the government agencies encompasses information to verify: ▪ the entitlement or eligibility of a person to earnings-related compensation  ▪ the amount of any earnings-related compensation to which a person is entitled, or ▪ whether any premium or levy is payable by a person or the amount of the premium or levy. If information matching reveals that a person in receipt of earningsrelated compensation was at the same time receiving income from employment (including self-employment) the Commissioner may supply ACC with the following information: ▪ the date or dates on which that employment commenced ▪ where applicable, the date or dates on which that employment ceased ▪ the name and business address of each employer so employing that person. If the person received other income while receiving earnings-related compensation, the Commissioner may also disclose to the ACC the amount of that other income for the relevant period, provided the other income affected entitlement to the compensation. ACC levies Information may be exchanged between IR and the ACC to facilitate the assessment of levies by the ACC: sch 7, pt C, cl 42 of the TAA. The range of information the Commissioner may supply to the ACC encompasses: ▪ the names, addresses and ACC file numbers of employers, selfemployed persons, private domestic workers and shareholderemployees ▪ the time of the commencement or cessation of a person’s status as an employer or a private domestic worker ▪ the time at which a self-employed person commenced or ceased business  ▪ the total amount paid in any year by an employer or a private domestic worker as employee earnings ▪ the earnings of a self-employed person ▪ the earnings of a shareholder-employee ▪ whether an employer, self-employed person, private domestic worker or shareholder-employee has a tax agent and, if so, the tax agent’s name and contact details, and ▪ in the case of an employer, self-employed person, private domestic worker or shareholder-employee who is an individual, whether the individual is deceased and, if so, the individual’s date of death and the name and contact details of the administrator or executor of the individual’s estate. From 1 December 2020, it has been clarified that no information may be disclosed under these clauses except where either an information matching agreement has been entered into under Pt 10 of the Privacy Act 1993 and continued under the Privacy Act 2020, or an approved information sharing agreement has been entered into under subpart 1 of Pt 7 of the Privacy Act 2020. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7 pt C, cls 41, 42  ¶1-629 Permitted disclosure: fines defaulters Information may be exchanged between the Commissioner and an officer, employee or agent of the Ministry of Justice for the purpose of establishing an information matching programme to enable the Ministry of Justice to locate persons with unpaid fines. If the Commissioner holds information relating to a fines defaulter, then she may supply any of the following information about that person to the Ministry of Justice: ▪ the person’s last known address and telephone number, and  ▪ the name, address and telephone number of the person’s last known employer. A fines defaulter is a person in default in payment of: ▪ an amount required to be paid under sentence or by court order, including reparation, expenses, costs of enforcement and an offender levy but excluding an amount ordered to be paid in civil proceedings ▪ a fine imposed by the High Court ▪ a fine relating to gains from drug dealing ▪ an amount payable for the shortfall on the sale of a confiscated motor vehicle. From 1 December 2020, it has been clarified that no information may be disclosed under this clause except where either an information matching agreement has been entered into under Pt 10 of the Privacy Act 1993 and continued under the Privacy Act 2020, or an approved information sharing agreement has been entered into under subpart 1 of Pt 7 of the Privacy Act 2020. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7, Pt C, cl 43  ¶1-631 Permitted disclosure: child support exemption Information may be exchanged between the Commissioner and an officer, employee or agent of the New Zealand Police or the Ministry of Justice to determine the possible application of the child support exemption for a liable parent who conceives a child as a result of a sex offence. A sex offence is any offence under ss 127–144C of the Crimes Act 1961. The information that may be provided is:  ▪ whether a particular person has been convicted of a sex offence or been proved to have committed a sex offence before the Youth Court and details of that offence ▪ whether a particular person is the victim of that offence ▪ whether a conviction for that offence has been quashed, or a finding of the Youth Court that a sex offence has been committed has been reversed or set aside ▪ whether any court has ordered a new trial, and ▪ any other particulars the Commissioner considers relevant. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7, pt C, cl 44  ¶1-633 Permitted disclosure: foreign social security agreement Information may be exchanged between the Commissioner and Work and Income in order to provide assistance to another country with the implementation of a social security agreement made between New Zealand and that country: sch 7, Pt C cl 45 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Personal information received by the Commissioner in accordance with a social security agreement may be used only to make an assessment of tax or to detect tax fraud or evasion. Personal information is information that identifies an individual, and includes that person’s tax file number. The range of information that may be supplied by the Commissioner in relation to a person encompasses: ▪ the person’s street address ▪ the name and street address of the person’s last known employer  ▪ details of income when a comparison indicates that the person is receiving, or has received, income ▪ the names and dates of birth of the person’s dependent children if known, and ▪ any other information held by the Commissioner that is of a type specified in the social security agreement. From 1 December 2020, it has been clarified that no information may be disclosed under this clause except where either an information matching agreement has been entered into under Pt 10 of the Privacy Act 1993 and continued under the Privacy Act 2020, or an approved information sharing agreement has been entered into under subpart 1 of Pt 7 of the Privacy Act 2020. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7, Pt C, cl 45  ¶1-634 Permitted disclosure: parental leave payments Information may be exchanged between the Commissioner and Work and Income in order to verify entitlements to a parental leave payment or a preterm baby payment. The Commissioner may refuse an application for payment of a parental leave payment or a preterm baby payment when it appears a parental tax credit has been paid. The Commissioner may also refuse or recover a parental tax credit if a parental leave payment or preterm baby payment is to be, or has been, paid. Law: TAA s 18H, sch 7, Pt C, cl 46  ¶1-636 Permitted disclosure for international purposes Section 18I provides that the confidentiality rule for revenue officers (see ¶1-604) does not apply to sensitive revenue information disclosed for the purposes of an international obligation of the Commissioner prescribed by sch 7, Pt D. Reciprocal laws or arrangements  The Commissioner may communicate information to any authorised officer of an overseas Government where a revenue law affecting the incidence of tax or duty is expressed to be conditional on the existence of a reciprocal law or concession in that country or where a reciprocal arrangement has been made with that Government affecting the incidence of tax or duty. Any such communication is limited to such information as is necessary to enable the overseas Government to give effect to the reciprocal law or concession or to the reciprocal arrangement. See sch 7, cl 48. Arrangements for relief of double taxation The Commissioner is not prevented from disclosing required information under a double tax agreement or tax recovery agreement to a person authorised to receive such information under the law of the territory in relation to which the double tax agreement or tax recovery agreement has been made. The Court of Appeal considered the disclosure of information by the Commissioner to the Australian Tax Office (ATO) in Avowal Administrative Attorneys Ltd v District Court at North Shore (2010) 24 NZTC 24,252. The High Court had found ((2009) 24 NZTC 23,252) that it was permissible to use the Commissioner’s powers under the former s 16 (now s 17) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) to obtain information for the purpose of supplying that information to the ATO under art 26 of the Australia–New Zealand DTA. On appeal it was argued that the power to pass that information on was limited by former ss 81 and 88 (now sch 7 of the TAA). The Court of Appeal held that despite the duty to maintain secrecy in relation to tax information, the exception under former s 88 applied in this case because an exchange of information process between the two countries had taken place based on the fact that both countries were investigating the same large-scale tax mitigation scheme which straddled the two jurisdictions. The Court of Appeal briefly touched on whether former s 88 applies only where the Commissioner is required to provide the information under the DTA and not to information which is voluntarily provided,  but found it unnecessary to deal with that argument in detail. See [60] of the judgment. See sch 7, cl 49. Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18I, sch 7 Pt D  ¶1-638 Permitted disclosure to reduce or remove harm A permitted disclosure of sensitive revenue information may be made if disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat to public health or public safety, or to the life or health of a person: s 18J of the Tax Administration Act 1994. A serious threat is defined as a threat that the Commissioner reasonably believes to be serious having regard to— ▪ the likelihood of the threat being realised ▪ the severity of the consequences if the threat is realised, and ▪ the time at which the threat may be realised. The Commissioner has confirmed that a disclosure of this type must only be made to the person, body or agency that is able to do something to prevent or lessen the threat. Example: An Inland Revenue staff member is speaking with a customer on the phone. During the call the customer makes comments and threats leading the staff member to think that the customer may harm themselves or others. In this situation information could be disclosed to the Police so they can take appropriate steps to prevent the harm. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31 No 4, May 2019 at 51.  Law: TAA ss 16C(3), 18J  ¶1-640 Permitted disclosure: misapplication of charitable funds  The Commissioner may disclose to the Minister of Revenue instances of the application of funds by a gift-exempt body for a purpose that is not of a charitable, benevolent, philanthropic or cultural nature. Grounds for such a disclosure exist when the Commissioner has reason to believe funds might be or are being applied for a purpose other than one referred to above. The name of any person who has made a donation to the gift-exempt body must not be revealed to the Minister. The nature of a charitable purpose is discussed at ¶24-195. Law: TAA s 18K  ¶1-642 Official Information Act releases All information held by Inland Revenue is official information subject to the Official Information Act 1982. A person may make a request under that Act if they are: ▪ A New Zealand citizen or permanent resident ▪ A person in New Zealand ▪ A corporate entity (a company or incorporated society) which: □ is incorporated in New Zealand, or □ has a place of business here. Requests may be made via the Inland Revenue website (www.classic.ird.govt.nz/aboutir/information/requesting-informationfrom-us.html). Otherwise a person may: ▪ email oia@ird.govt.nz for official information requests ▪ email privacy.officer@ird.govt.nz for personal information requests  ▪ call on 0800 775 247 ▪ write to: Information Requests Inland Revenue PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 The Inland Revenue website advises: “When you make your request, make sure you include: ▪ that you’re making a request for information ▪ the information you’re requesting, eg, documents or information on a topic created within a stated timeframe such as January 2016 to June 2016 ▪ your name ▪ your preferred address for receiving information (postal or email) ▪ a daytime contact phone number ▪ your IRD number (if you know it) when requesting personal information — this will help us identify you and make sure we give you the correct information.”  ¶1-645 Requirements for giving notices The Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), Income Tax Act 2007, Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) and KiwiSaver Act 2006 often require parties to give notice. The rules for giving notices were changed with effect from 2 June 2016. These rules are discussed below. (Note that the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011  (SLSA) contains its own rules for giving notice under that Act (see ss 210–214 of the SLSA).) The rules clarify the communication options available and also provide general rules governing methods of communication delivery. In addition, where legislation requires the Commissioner, a taxpayer or a third party to ask, request, inform, apply or notify, these verbs have been defined. Communications framework A communications framework, contained in ss 14–14G of the TAA, facilitates the information flows between the Commissioner and a person, and between two persons where the tax legislation governs that interaction. The rules preserve the precedence of prescribed forms and formats and any specific requirements covered within particular sections. Practically, this means that where paper forms have been prescribed, but no electronic equivalents have been made available, taxpayers will be required to continue to file paper returns on prescribed forms until electronic equivalents are made available. Section 14E also preserves the overriding effect of double tax agreements and other inter-governmental treaties, by applying the new communication rules only to the extent to which they are not inconsistent with the application of the particular agreement. Three tiers of communication Sections 14B–14D create three distinct tiers to accommodate various modes of communication ranging from the informal (including oral communication) to electronic (whether by electronic filing through IR’s website, email or other electronic means) to more formal methods requiring paper or original documents. The tiers are signalled by the use of the following verbs — ask, request, or inform; apply or notify; and formally notify. Ask, request or inform The first tier is found in s 14B and deals with person A: ▪ asking person B for something  ▪ requesting something from person B, or ▪ informing person B about something. In each case, person A may communicate: ▪ by telephone ▪ orally in person in a manner acceptable to the Commissioner ▪ by electronic means for an item of information delivered in an appropriate way (see below) ▪ in print and delivered in an appropriate way (see below), or ▪ in another manner permitted by the Commissioner. Communication under this tier does not include communication on the internet or by other electronic means if person B is not directly alerted to the communication in some manner. Apply or notify The second tier is found in s 14C and deals with person A: ▪ applying to person B for something, or ▪ notifying person B about something. In each case, person A may communicate: ▪ by electronic means for an item of information delivered in an appropriate way (see below) ▪ in print and delivered in an appropriate way (see below), or ▪ in another manner permitted by the Commissioner. Communication under this tier also does not include communication on the internet or by other electronic means if person B is not directly alerted to the communication in some manner.  Formally notify The third tier is in s 14D and deals with provisions that refer to or describe person A formally notifying person B. In this case, person A may communicate only in print, delivered personally or by registered post. Communication under this tier does not include communication by email, the internet or other electronic means. General rules Communication by electronic means must comply with Pt 4 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017. If communication is in print, it does not matter whether the document is handwritten, typewritten or otherwise visibly represented or whether it is copied or reproduced on paper. The first and second tiers allow for the Commissioner to permit new modes of communication, thereby allowing the framework to be expanded and adapted as systems are upgraded or new technologies emerge, without the need to extensively amend the legislation each time. Delivery methods Sections 14F and 14G establish delivery rules that ensure that communications, in particular electronic communications, are delivered only to appropriate contact addresses. This is important to protect both IR and taxpayers from the risk of misdirected communications and to guard against an inadvertent breach of the tax secrecy provisions. Section 14F sets out the rules that apply when person A is required to deliver information to person B. The applicable rules depend upon whether the Commissioner is person A, person B or neither. Communications by the Commissioner When the Commissioner is person A, she may communicate with person B (or a representative authorised to act on behalf of person B): ▪ if person B is not a corporate body, either by personal delivery to person B or by personal delivery to person B’s usual or last  known place of residence ▪ if person B is a corporate body, by personal delivery to person B’s office during working hours, or ▪ by delivery to person B’s contact address as described in s 14G (see below). Communications to the Commissioner When the Commissioner is person B, person A may communicate with the Commissioner: ▪ by electronic means ▪ by fax, to a fax number that has been provided by the Commissioner ▪ by personal delivery during working hours to an office of the department that is available to accept communication of the information, or ▪ by post to the street address of an office of the department or to the post office box number of the department. Communications between others Where the Commissioner is neither person A nor person B, then person A may communicate with person B: ▪ if person B is not a corporate body, by personal delivery to person B ▪ if person B is a corporate body, by personal delivery to person B’s office during working hours, or ▪ by delivery to person B’s contact address as described in s 14G (see below). Contact addresses  For these purposes, a person’s contact address may be one of the following: ▪ for delivery by electronic means to a person who is not a corporate body: □ an email or other electronic address they have provided □ their last known email or other electronic address □ an email or other electronic address of the person that is otherwise available, if there are reasonable grounds to suppose that the person will receive the communication ▪ for delivery by electronic means to a person who is a corporate body: □ an email or other electronic address of the corporate body provided by a person acting for the corporate body □ the last known email or other electronic address of a person acting for the corporate body □ an email or other electronic address of the corporate body that is otherwise available, if there are reasonable grounds to suppose that a person acting for the corporate body will receive the communication ▪ for delivery by post: □ the street address of their usual or last known place of residence □ the street address of any of their usual or last known places of business, or □ any other address of the person, if they have notified the Commissioner that they accept delivery at the address ▪ for delivery by fax, a fax number that has been provided or is otherwise available.  General rules A communication by post is treated as having been given at the time the communication would have been delivered in the ordinary course of the post. An electronic communication is taken to be received: ▪ in the case of an addressee who has designated an information system for the purpose of receiving electronic communications, at the time the electronic communication enters that information system, or ▪ in any other case, at the time the electronic communication comes to the attention of the addressee. For the purposes of ss 14F and 14G, delivery by electronic means does not include a communication to a fax number. Accepting electronic signatures Section 13B allows for documents to be “signed” with a digital or electronic signature. It applies to all information provided to the Commissioner including, for example, electronically submitted tax returns or application forms. When a person provides an electronically signed document, unless there are reasonable grounds to suppose otherwise, the document will be treated as signed by that person and the person will be treated as complying with the Commissioner’s guidelines and Pt 4 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017. Standard for use of electronic signature In October 2016, the Commissioner released a standard, “Standard for the use of a valid electronic signature on documents provided to the Commissioner” (updated in August 2017 to take account of the enactment of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017). Inland Revenue (IR) will accept an electronic signature on all documents and information that currently require a conventional signature, where this option is specified in the relevant document or associated guidelines.  Customers may only use an electronic signature when submitting documents and information to IR where they are using IR’s online services, or they provide an electronic signature (whether directly or via a tax agent or other intermediary) that complies with the requirements set out in the standard. The conditions for presumption of reliability in s 228 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017 must be met. The item states that third party software providers must implement administrative, physical and technical safeguards that are no less rigorous than accepted industry practices, including certain specified ISO standards, to protect confidential information. If the integrity of a transaction is questioned, the third party provider must be able to demonstrate the validity of the transaction on their system or intermediary systems. The software must maintain log files and the log files must be considered and treated as “business records” for the purposes of the TAA and the Evidence Act 2006. Law: TAA ss 13B, 14–14G; IT07 s YA 4; KIW s 217; GST s 75B  TAX RETURNS Introduction to tax returns  ¶2-010  Assessment and Collection of Income Tax ¶2-015 Calculation of Tax  ¶2-105  Payment of Tax  ¶2-115  Recovery of Tax  ¶2-165  ¶2-010 Introduction to tax returns The provisions governing the liability to furnish returns of income are contained in Pt 3 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Every taxpayer must furnish a return of income for a tax year. A tax year runs from 1 April to the following 31 March. Before 1 April 2019, there were also separate sets of rules governing the use of income statements. Most individuals who derived income simply from employment, interest or dividends would have their final income tax liability determined by means of an income statement (which was also informally referred to as a personal tax summary) rather than by means of an annual tax return. However, with effect from 1 April 2019, for the year-end processes for the 2018–19 and later income years, the provisions relating to income statements were repealed and the procedures for a taxpayer’s year end simplified even further. The changes ensure that most individuals pay what they need to and receive what they are entitled to during the year, without the need to file returns or claim refunds. A pre-populated account is prepared by Inland Revenue (IR), containing the income information IR holds for the taxpayer. For qualifying individuals, this pre-populated account is used to create an assessment and the taxpayer’s tax position is effectively automatically calculated. Refunds are paid out without taxpayers  having to request them, and certain amounts of tax to pay are written off. The rules are discussed in detail in ¶2-016 below. Certain individuals must furnish a return, such as provisional taxpayers, non-residents and those who have made a tax loss or have a tax loss carried forward. Companies and persons carrying on business for any part of an income year must also furnish returns, regardless of whether they have incurred a profit or a loss. Equally important is the capacity in which an individual has received income. For example, an individual might derive income personally, as the agent for a non-resident, in the capacity of trustee or as a member of a partnership. Different tax returns are required in each case. See ¶2-015. A return must be signed, contain all necessary information, and be accompanied by all necessary documents. The obligation is discharged only when the return is received by an IR office. It is sufficient if the person can prove that a correctly addressed return was posted to the appropriate IR office. See Martin Holdings Ltd v C of IR (1973) 1 NZTC 61,081 (SC). See also Case T23 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,148, in which the Taxation Review Authority ruled that a tax return is furnished when it is received at IR’s post office box. Law: TAA Pt 3, ss 33, 40  ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF INCOME TAX ¶2-015 Form and content of return General content A return must contain the information and must be accompanied by all the documents required under any of the Inland Revenue Acts. This includes a notice of self-assessment. In practice, Inland Revenue tax return forms contain a notice of self-assessment and declaration at the end of the form. Returns must be signed. For  returns furnished electronically, an electronic signature is sufficient if the requirements in s 13B are met (see discussion in ¶1-645). Persons need not personally fill out and sign their own returns. A return made by or on behalf of any person is deemed to have been made by the person or on his or her authority, unless the contrary is proved. See ¶2-036. Return types The main returns are as follows. Individuals ▪ Form IR 3 is for self-employed individuals and others who pay provisional tax on investment or business income (including partners). Some private domestic workers (eg nannies or gardeners) who pay tax as IR 56 payers may have to file an IR 3 return. ▪ Form IR 3B (supplementary to form IR 3) is for business or professional taxpayers trading on their own account with business income, who are required to analyse their income and deductions. ▪ Form IR 3F (supplementary to form IR 3) is for taxpayers carrying on a farming business on their own account. ▪ Form IR 3NR is for non-residents. Companies ▪ Form IR 4 is for companies, incorporated societies, public authorities, unit trusts, certain group investment funds and state enterprises liable for tax. (Note that only one return is required for companies within a consolidated group.) ▪ Form IR 4J is used if the company is required to keep an imputation credit account. ▪ Form IR 4S is for company shareholders’ details.  Trusts and estates ▪ Form IR 6 is for trustees in relation to trust and estate income. (When an estate has income from a farming business, form IR 3B or IR 3F can also be used.) ▪ Form IR 6B is required if income is distributed to beneficiaries. ▪ Form IR 307 is used if distributions of beneficiary income or taxable distributions are made to beneficiaries from a foreign or non-complying trust. ▪ Form IR 900 is for resident trustees of a foreign trust. Partnerships ▪ Form IR 7 is for partnerships and form IR 7P is used for partnership income/loss distribution (see ¶2-050). In addition, partnerships must also file one of the following: □ a financial statements summary (form IR 10) □ a set of the partnership’s financial statements □ a completed form IR 3F (farming) or IR 3B (business income), if applicable. Each partner must file a personal tax return (form IR 3) with all income including a share from the partnership. The partnership is not assessed for tax, but each partner is liable to pay tax on his or her share of income. Look-through companies (LTCs) Form IR 7 is also for LTCs and IR 7L is used to show the LTC income/loss distribution. In addition, LTCs must also file one of the following: ▪ a financial statements summary (form IR 10) ▪ a set of the LTC’s financial statements  ▪ a completed form IR 3F (farming) or IR 3B (business income), if applicable. See further at ¶19-240. Other ▪ Form IR 8 is for Māori authorities. ▪ Form IR 9 is for clubs and societies. ▪ Form IR 44 is for registered superannuation funds. ▪ Form IR 44E is for group investment funds. An individual may be required to file several different returns according to the particular capacities in which he or she acts. Example: Mr TP is a partner of a four-member law firm. He owns several properties in his own name which he rents out. He also acts as a trustee for several trusts established on behalf of his clients. Mr TP would need to ensure that he filed the following returns of income: ▪ form IR 3, which would include his share of partnership income and the rents received from his properties ▪ form IR 6, of which a separate form would need to be filed for each of the trusts for which Mr TP acts as trustee ▪ form IR 6B, if any income is distributed to beneficiaries, and ▪ form IR 7, which would include the income earned by the law firm of which Mr TP is a partner. As a variation on these facts, if some of the rental properties were owned by a family company and some jointly with his wife in partnership, Mr TP would need to ensure that the following returns were also filed: ▪ form IR 4, which would include the rental income earned by the family company ▪ form IR 4J, and ▪ form IR 7, which would include the rental income earned by Mr TP and his wife in partnership.  Law: TAA ss 13B, 33(2), 34, 40, 42  ¶2-016 Individuals’ year-end tax obligations from 1 April 2019 Changes to individuals’ year-end tax obligations ensure that most individuals pay what they need to and receive what they are entitled to during the year, without the need to file returns or claim refunds. The changes are found in Pt 3, subpart 3B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and apply from 1 April 2019 for the year-end processes for the 2018–19 and later income years. By receiving regular income information throughout the year, Inland Revenue (IR) will ensure individuals are on the appropriate tax code or rate and that about the right amount of tax is withheld throughout the year. A pre-populated account based on all the income information held will then be created. For most individuals, their tax position (refund or tax to pay) will effectively be automatically calculated, as the Commissioner will use the pre-populated account to create an assessment once she is satisfied the information in the account is complete and correct. Essentially, only those people who earn income or have deductions that IR does not already know about will have to provide further information. The legislation includes the following flowchart that outlines the scheme of the subpart:  The following discussion outlines the new end-of-year process in more detail. Qualifying individuals The subpart 3B process only applies to individuals. For these purposes, “individual” means a natural person and includes nonresidents, unless their only income for the income year is nonresidents’ foreign-sourced income. When a natural person dies, they are only included as an individual until their date of death, as after that date their estate will be treated as a trust until distributed. Where an individual derives only “reportable income” for an income year and has no other income information that must be provided to the Commissioner, they will be a “qualifying individual”. Generally, a qualifying individual will have their tax position automatically calculated for them. Example 1: John earns a salary of $70,000 per annum. His employer deducts PAYE correctly and remits this to Inland Revenue. John does not earn any other income. Per s 22E, the Commissioner includes this income information in John’s prepopulated account for the tax year. As Inland Revenue has no information that suggests John might be earning other income or reason to suspect the reportable income is incorrect, the Commissioner is satisfied that the information set out in John’s pre-populated account correctly and completely records his income for the tax year and, at the end of the tax year, finalises his account in accordance with s 22H(1). John is not required to do anything and will receive an email notification informing him that his notice of assessment is available via myIR. The notice of assessment informs John that Inland Revenue has calculated his assessment and that, in his case, he has no further tax to pay and is not due a tax refund as the correct tax was withheld by his employer.  Example 2: Adam works part-time at the local supermarket, and as he really loves cars and is a keen mechanic, in his spare time he fixes cars for his friend Brad’s auto garage. Adam gave Brad his IRD number and tax code when he first started at the garage, but he is not sure whether Brad accounts properly for any PAYE on his earnings as Brad is not an accountant and he’s never seen a pay slip. But since he gets such a good wage and Brad is a mate, he just never asks Brad about it.  In July Adam mentions his recent tax refund to Brad, as he was so impressed it was sorted for him by IR, and Brad tells him that he doesn’t account for any PAYE on what he pays Adam for his work at the garage. When he gets home that day Adam is worried that not enough tax is being paid, so he logs in to his myIR account to check his earnings for the previous tax year. Sure enough he can see his supermarket earnings are correctly recorded, but the account does not show any of his income from the garage. In this case the income he has earned as a mechanic is untaxed reportable income, and Adam knows that there is income missing (the earnings from the garage) s 22F(2) applies. This puts an obligation on Adam to tell IR about his missing income. If he does not tell IR, Adam would be in breach of s 22F(2) as he knows, or might reasonably be expected to have known, that an amount of income should properly be included in his final account for the tax year but is not. In this situation, Adam should inform Inland Revenue of the income information that is missing from his account. It is an absolute liability offence under s 143(1)(b) to not provide the Commissioner with information when required by law. Accordingly, Adam will be subject to penalties and interest on this undisclosed income if he does not inform Inland Revenue and Inland Revenue later finds out about the income. Examples taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 8.  Reportable income “Reportable income” covers sources of income that the Commissioner receives information on by way of third-party reporting during, or shortly after the end of, the year. This includes all PAYE income payments, payments of resident and non-resident passive income, certain benefits under an employee share scheme and, from 1 April 2020, attributed PIE income. The payer must have the individual’s tax file number (except in the case of certain jointlyderived income) and information on the income must be required to be provided to the Commissioner by 31 May in the next tax year or the relevant date under s 25K in the case of attributed PIE income (see ¶29-150). In the case of jointly-derived income, where the payer may only hold the tax file number of one of the individuals concerned, the requirement for a payer to hold an individual’s tax file number will not apply provided the Commissioner is able to allocate an amount to the individual.  Income that is not an individual’s reportable income is defined as their “other income” or “income other than reportable income”. Pre-populated accounts The Commissioner is required to provide a “pre-populated account” for each individual for a tax year. Under s 22E, it must include: ▪ all the income information held by the Commissioner for the tax year on reportable income, and ▪ all the income information on other income amounts the Commissioner considers the individual has derived for the income year, including any income information provided by the individual. An individual who has no reportable income for a tax year may ask the Commissioner to make available a pre-populated account with a zero balance so they may provide their income information for the tax year. Obligations to provide information Income other than reportable income An individual must provide information to the Commissioner on income derived in the year that is not reportable income where the total amount of that income is more than $200. Schedule 8, pt A, table 1 lists the following items on which information must be provided: ▪ income from a New Zealand estate or trust ▪ a foreign-sourced amount ▪ income from a partnership ▪ income from a look-through company ▪ income from rents ▪ income from self employment  ▪ a benefit under an employee share scheme in relation to an amount that is not reportable or exempt income ▪ other income, including income from a disposal of property that is not otherwise included in reportable income. An exception exists for income that is a benefit under an employee share scheme to the extent the individual’s employer has included the relevant information in their employment income information. In addition, an individual may provide information on the following additional amounts, listed in sch 8, pt A, table 2: ▪ a deduction ▪ an imputation tax credit carried forward ▪ a tax loss ▪ a donations tax credit ▪ an amount of income protection insurance. Example 3: Ian works part-time as a mechanic. To supplement his income, Ian starts his own lawn mowing business on 1 March 2019. For the first month, Ian only earns $188 in income from this venture. This means that, for the tax year ending 31 March 2019, Ian has less than $200 of “other income” and is therefore not required to provide this information to Inland Revenue. If Ian’s lawn mowing business grew in the following tax year and he earned $8,000, the entire amount would need to be reported to Inland Revenue in his account for the year. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 9.  Deceased individuals Where a taxpayer dies and no administrator or executor is appointed, normally there would be nobody who was legally obliged to provide the information on other income to the Commissioner and this could lead to the account not being finalised. To avoid this result,  the legislation provides for the Commissioner to publish a list of the classes of persons who are considered likely to have a relationship with a deceased individual and that the Commissioner considers may be the sort of person who is best placed to provide income information on behalf of a deceased individual. The Commissioner may then allow a person from this list to provide, to the best of their knowledge, income information for the deceased in order to finalise their account. The Commissioner has published this list of classes of persons in operational statement, OS 19/02 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 173), as follows: ▪ the widow or widower of the deceased person ▪ a person who is the surviving civil union/de-facto partner of the deceased person ▪ a child of the deceased person ▪ a person who is entitled to administer the estate ▪ a person related by blood or marriage and maintaining the deceased person’s child/children ▪ a person who has the custody and control of the decreased person’s child/children. Reportable income An individual has no obligation to provide information in relation to reportable income that is not included in their pre-populated account unless the individual knows, or might reasonably be expected to have known, that the amount should properly be included in their final account. Amending accounts Amending by individuals  When incorrect information has been provided to the Commissioner or information is missing, an individual may amend income information in their pre-populated account at any time before the account is finalised. A qualifying individual, however, may amend the income information in their final account at any time before their terminal tax date for the tax year without being charged interest (unless they are subject to the provisional tax regime) or penalties. In this case, any earlier assessment for the tax year is treated as not having been made. This will not apply if the Commissioner has reason to believe the amended information is incorrect. The Commissioner may decide not to accept the information as correct and provide a default assessment under s 106(1A). After their terminal tax date, any individual may ask the Commissioner to amend information in their final account under s 113. Example 4: Lauren is an accountant earning a salary. The only income information Inland Revenue has received in relation to Lauren for the tax year is her salary income, and her earnings in previous tax years have always been consistent with this position. As such, Inland Revenue has no reason not to be satisfied that the information in Lauren’s pre-populated account is correct and complete and her account is therefore finalised on 15 May 2019 in accordance with s 22H. What Inland Revenue does not know is that Lauren earnt $2,000 during the 2018–19 tax year regularly babysitting for a friend. On 1 November 2019 Lauren logs into her myIR to add this “other income” information. Although by virtue of adding this “other income” information into her final account Lauren is no longer a “qualifying individual”, she was treated by Inland Revenue as a qualifying individual and therefore still falls within s 22G(3) for the correction of postassessment errors by qualifying individuals. This means that when Lauren logs in on 1 November 2019 to add additional income information, this is not treated as an amended assessment but rather as a new assessment. The assessment that resulted when Inland Revenue finalised her account on 15 May 2019 is regarded as not having been made. Lauren will now have until her terminal tax date to pay any resultant tax bill and will not be subject to any penalties or interest provided that the amount due is paid on time. In the following year she is likely to be prompted to provide additional income information so that Inland Revenue can confirm whether she has continued to earn other income from babysitting.  Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 12.  Amending by the Commissioner The Commissioner may correct errors in the information in an individual’s pre-populated account. She must notify the individual of any amendment. The Commissioner may also correct errors in the information in a qualifying individual’s final account at any time before the end of the time bar period in s 108(1). The qualifying individual must be notified of the amendment. However, if the Commissioner wishes to make an adjustment to the information of an individual other than a qualifying individual, the Commissioner must issue a notice of proposed adjustment under the dispute resolution process. Example 5: Rachel is a qualifying individual earning salary and wages. Her tax position is automatically calculated by Inland Revenue for the 2018–19 tax year and it is determined that she has tax payable of $100. Rachel pays this amount before her terminal tax date of 7 February 2020. On 1 March 2020 Inland Revenue realises that a mistake has been made in calculating Rachel’s tax position for the 2018–19 tax year because her employer contacts Inland Revenue to correct several periods of employment income information. Instead of having $100 tax payable, Rachel actually had $300 of tax payable, because her employment income information has been incorrectly reported. Section 22G(6) means that Inland Revenue can amend Rachel’s return and issues her with a tax bill for the additional $200. Rachel is given an additional 30 days, commencing on 2 March 2020, to pay this additional $200 (see s 142AB). Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 15.  Finalising accounts Qualifying individuals If the Commissioner is satisfied that the income information of a qualifying individual for a tax year, as set out in their pre-populated account, correctly and completely records their income for the year, the Commissioner may finalise the individual’s account.  If the Commissioner requests income information from a qualifying individual, the individual may correct any errors in their reportable income information and finalise their account by confirming the adjusted income information correctly and completely records their income for the year. Other individuals Individuals, other than qualifying individuals, may: ▪ adjust their pre-populated account by providing the information income required on their other income ▪ correct any errors in their reportable income information, and ▪ finalise their account by confirming the adjusted income information correctly and completely records their income for the year. The adjustment, correction or confirmation is due to be made by 7 July (or a later date if they have an extension of time to file a return). Example 6: Roman studies at a university in Wellington and works part time at a local supermarket earning wages. When university is over for the year, Roman goes back home to Christchurch. For the last few years, Roman has operated a car washing business over the holiday period which nets him about $1,800 in additional income. Roman has filed an IR3 return for the previous tax years to account for this additional income. On 1 April 2019, Roman’s pre-populated account only includes his supermarket wages which have been reported to Inland Revenue. Based on Roman’s past returns, he has been an earner of “other income” in past tax years so Inland Revenue does not automatically finalise Roman’s account and instead prompts Roman to provide the additional information about his business earnings for the year. On 15 June 2019 Roman logs into myIR and updates his pre-populated account to include his business income. Roman then confirms that his pre-populated account is complete and correct. Roman’s account is finalised and his tax assessment crystallises, he is sent a notice of assessment which sets out the amount of tax he has left to pay. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 10.  Effect of finalised account The final account of an individual is treated as a return of income and an assessment, and the individual is treated as having made a statement of their tax position. The date of the assessment is the date the individual’s pre-populated account is finalised. If the individual does not satisfy the Commissioner that their income is correctly and completely recorded in their pre-populated account, the date the assessment is made is when the Commissioner provides a default assessment under s 106. In either case, the Commissioner must notify an individual when the assessment is made. Refunds and amounts of tax to pay IR will automatically calculate whether individuals are entitled to a refund or have tax to pay. Refunds will be paid out without individuals having to request them. They will be paid by direct credit to a bank account, unless that will result in undue hardship or is not practicable. Amounts of tax to pay by a qualifying individual will be written off by the Commissioner if: ▪ the amount is $50 or less, or ▪ the amount relates to reportable income derived solely from an income tested benefit, an education grant, a payment of New Zealand superannuation or a veteran’s pension. No amount will qualify for a write off under the second bullet point above if the individual has received an entitlement and tax credit under the family scheme provisions. The Commissioner may reverse the write off if the individual no longer meets the requirements. Example 7:  Dan is a prison warden and earns $50,000 per annum. When his father died, he was left an inheritance of $20,000. Dan has this in a low risk term deposit with his local bank and earns 5% interest per year. When Dan set the term deposit up he used the most appropriate RWT rate for his expected income, which was 30%. On 1 April 2018, Dan is promoted at work to senior warden, and now earns $70,000 per annum. This means that Dan’s marginal tax rate is now 33% and therefore, 33% is the appropriate RWT rate for Dan to be on to ensure that his interest income is taxed correctly. Dan remains on the 30% RWT rate for the entire 2018–19 tax year. It follows that the $1,000 in interest that he earns from his term deposit would have been under withheld by $30, leaving him with tax to pay of $30. When the new individuals’ income tax changes kick in on 1 April 2019, Dan, as a reportable income earner who has never had any other income, has his assessment finalised by the Commissioner. This leaves Dan with a $30 tax bill, but this is written off automatically as it is under $50. After Dan’s tax position has been squared up, Dan realises that he fixed his neighbour’s car in March and was paid $1000 for his handy work. Dan logs onto myIR and makes an amendment to submit the $1,000 of other income. Dan’s tax position is recalculated, and he has a tax bill of $360.00. This is comprised of 33% tax on $1000 at Dan’s marginal rate (or $330) and, because Dan is now no longer an individual who solely earns reportable income, Dan no longer meets the requirements for the $30.00 write off he received. The write off is therefore reversed as per new s 22J(2). Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 31.  With effect from 1 April 2020 (for the year-end processes for the 2019–20 and later income years), if a qualifying individual has tax to pay because they have had an extra pay period, that amount of tax to pay will be written off. However, write offs will also be denied in certain circumstances where the Commissioner has recommended a change to a higher tax code or rate or the individual has used a tailored tax code, and where the amount payable is a result of the incorrect application of the tax rules or the application of an incorrect marginal tax rate to certain specified types of income. The Commissioner may, however, still write off an amount in these circumstances if the amount is not substantial and represents an underpayment of tax that is attributable to a function or operation of the tax collection rules. ▸ Note: The threshold for writing off has been temporarily increased from $50 to $200 for the 2020 year in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. From 3 June 2020, the Commissioner must write off an  amount of tax relating to income derived for a tax year by a qualifying individual that is equal to or less than $200. For a detailed discussion of an individual’s year-end tax obligations under Pt 3, subpart 3B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and further examples of how the provisions work, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 4-37. Law: TAA ss 22C-22M, 106, 184A, sch 8  ¶2-017 Dates for furnishing returns The due dates for the filing of annual returns of income are: ▪ 7th day of the 4th month after the end of the person’s corresponding income year for any person with a late balance date (ie 1 April to 30 September), and ▪ 7 July for all other persons. Note that these dates do not apply to persons who have their returns prepared and filed by tax agents. See ¶2-018. For these purposes, an annual return for an individual subject to the pre-populated account provisions in Pt 3, subpart 3B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see ¶2-016) will be their finalised account. When received in time A tax return is treated as being filed only when it has been received at an Inland Revenue office. Example: This section was considered by the Taxation Review Authority where it was held that a tax return was delivered to the Commissioner when it was received at his private bag at the Post Office. See Case T23 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,148.  Law: TAA ss 37(1), 40(3)  ¶2-018 Extension of time to file returns Any person can apply to the Commissioner for an extension of time to furnish an annual income return. This is likely to occur where the person does not have an extension of time arrangement through a tax agent (see below). Provided the application (which can be made verbally or in writing) is made before the due date for filing the return, the Commissioner may grant the extension if she thinks it “proper in the circumstances”. Standard practice statement SPS 09/03, “Extension of time applications from taxpayers without tax agents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 9, December 2009 at 27) gives the following examples of reasons Inland Revenue (IR) considers appropriate for extending the filing date: ▪ the person is unable to obtain the necessary information to file the return (eg is waiting to receive information from IR) ▪ the person has been overseas and needs extra time to prepare a return (depending on departure and returning dates) ▪ ill health, hospitalisation or injury of the person or the person’s family member (eg partner or dependant), and ▪ the person is awaiting the finalisation of financial statements for a related person with a different balance date. IR will also take into account the person’s history of filing returns. In addition, with effect from 1 April 2019, for the year-end processes for the 2018–19 and later income years, provision has been made for the situation where a systems issue arises for an IR digital platform that prevents a person, or class of persons, from providing a required return or income information. The Commissioner can grant a proportionate extension of time if it is considered proper in the circumstances. Tax agents The Commissioner can also grant extensions to tax agents. A tax agent is a person who is eligible to be a tax agent and who is listed  as a tax agent by the Commissioner. To be eligible to be a tax agent, the person must prepare the returns for 10 or more taxpayers and be a person who is: ▪ a practitioner in a professional public practice ▪ carrying on a business, occupation or employment in which returns of income are prepared, or ▪ the Māori Trustee. To be listed as a tax agent the Commissioner must be satisfied that the person is entitled to be a tax agent and that the listing will not adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. Statutory declaration An individual has to complete form IR 791, “Statutory declaration to be a listed tax agent or update a tax agent’s details”. The form must be witnessed and sent to IR with a list of at least 10 return-filing clients. A copy of the individual’s proposed authority letter also needs to be attached. For a non-individual, or entity, each key office holder must complete a “Statutory declaration for an intermediary” (IR 768). Key office holders Key office holders for the following include: ▪ body corporate (other than a closely held company) □ Tax manager □ Chief Financial Officer □ Chief Executive Officer, and □ Directors ▪ closely held companies □ all shareholders  ▪ partnerships □ all partners ▪ unincorporated bodies □ each member of the entity. Extension of time for tax agents The Commissioner may extend the time for filing for tax agents to not later than one of the following days: ▪ where the return is for any year ending between 30 September and the following 31 March, the day is the next succeeding 31 March, or ▪ where the return is for any year ending between 31 March and 1 October, the day is the following 31 March. The Commissioner may cancel an extension of time arrangement if a tax agent has not filed the required number of tax returns by the dates that the Commissioner has specified. If a tax agent has not negotiated personal guidelines, then the standard interim dates set by the Commissioner apply. For example, in relation to the filing of income tax returns, IR has set three standard filing dates throughout the year (in September, November and February) by which tax agents have to file a certain percentage (40%, 60% and 80%) of their clients’ tax returns. These dates apply if the agent has not negotiated their own particular filing dates. The outcome is that the Commissioner can cancel the extension of time arrangement if these targets are not met. Law: TAA ss 37, 124C, 124E, 124G  ¶2-019 Electronic filing of returns The Commissioner may give approval to any person or GSTregistered person and/or the person’s agent to file information electronically. The return must be filed in the prescribed format and  approval may be subject to any conditions specified by the Commissioner. Where the return has been filed electronically, a signed, hard-copy of the return does not need to be retained if the information is kept in an electronic form meeting the requirements of s 229 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017. The information must be retained for at least seven years. An agent may sign any hard-copy form of a return where the return is filed electronically. Inland Revenue is able to accept most income tax returns (IR 3, IR 3NR, IR 4, IR 6, IR 7, IR 8 and IR 9), employment income information and correspondence by electronic means, including details required under the provisional tax pooling provisions or in relation to the operation of the person’s environmental restoration account. The Commissioner may also approve electronic filing of GST returns. GST and FBT returns (see ¶21-030) can also be filed online. A return or information furnished by electronic means must be transmitted in an electronic format prescribed under s 33E, 35, 36, 36A, 36AB, 36B, 36BB, 36BC, 36BD or 36BE of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see s 36C). Employers with a combined PAYE and employer’s superannuation contributions tax bill of $50,000 or more for the preceding tax year, must submit their employment income information digitally unless they obtain a special dispensation from the Commissioner. See ¶3023. There is a penalty for non-electronic filing (see ¶14-045), although new businesses starting up are given a six-month leeway period (see s 36CA). GST returns required electronically With effect from 29 March 2018, s 36BD provides for the setting of a taxable supplies threshold above which GST-registered persons are required to file their GST return with Inland Revenue electronically in a prescribed format. The threshold will be set separately by Order in Council.  GST-registered persons below the threshold will still be able to voluntarily file electronically. The Commissioner may exempt a registered person, or class of registered persons, from the electronic filing requirements. The Commissioner must have regard to: ▪ the nature and availability of digital services to the person or persons in the class, including the reliability of those services for their purposes ▪ the capability of the person or class of persons relating to the use of computers, and ▪ the costs they would incur in complying with the requirements if those costs would be unreasonable in the circumstances. The Commissioner must provide a statement of reasons for the exemption. Generally the exemption remains valid until the Commissioner notifies the registered person that it is to be cancelled, in which case it expires six months after the date given in the notice. However, the Commissioner may set a time limit on the exemption when it is made. Although the provision applies from 29 March 2018, it will only affect taxpayers once a threshold has been set. Law: TAA ss 22AAC, 36, 36BD, 36C, 36D, 36CA, 40  ¶2-020 Miscellaneous returns Individuals who are required to furnish a return of income must select the return of income form appropriate to their circumstances. There are a number of different forms prescribed for different persons; for example, fringe benefit tax returns and GST returns where the individual or entity is an employer and/or registered for GST. Some of the more commonly used forms are available on the Inland Revenue website: www.ird.govt.nz. The Commissioner has the power to requisition the following returns:  ▪ an annual ICA return from companies for any period specified by the Commissioner ▪ returns from companies, local or public authorities in relation to interest paid on debentures ▪ special returns from certain taxpayers (eg agents, non-residents and executors — see further under ¶2-050). In addition to the specific filing requirements set out above, the Commissioner is empowered to request any further annual or other return from any person (taxpayer or not) for the purposes of the Tax Administration Act 1994 or the Income Tax Act 2007. See ¶2-050. Law: TAA ss 62, 70, 79, 80  ¶2-026 Non-active companies and returns Non-active companies may elect not to file a return. To apply for the exemption, a company must declare that it is a non-active company and that it will notify the Commissioner if it ceases to be so. A nonactive company for these purposes is one that has not derived any income, has no deductions, has not disposed, or deemed to have disposed, of any assets and has not been a party to any transaction that gives rise to deemed income in any person’s hands, a debit to the company’s imputation account, or fringe benefit to an employee. Companies incorporated for name protection purposes or to be available as shelf companies will generally be entitled to the concession. Note that no account is taken of statutory company filing fees or associated accounting or other costs, bank charges or other minimal administration costs totalling not more than $50, or bank interest totalling less than the bank charges. Where a company ceases to be non-active the Commissioner must be notified, along with information regarding any tax losses and change in ownership. The Commissioner has the power to require a non-active company to file a tax return or imputation return despite the company’s status as a non-active company.  A New Zealand-resident company with a standard balance date is not required to file an imputation credit account return for a tax year during which it is a non-active company. Similar concessions exist for New Zealand-resident companies with non-standard balance dates. Law: TAA s 43A  ¶2-027 Non-active trusts and returns Non-active trusts may elect not to file a return. To apply for the exemption, throughout the tax year, the trust must be a non-active complying trust and a trustee must have declared that the trust is a non-active trust and that it will notify the Commissioner if it ceases to be so. A trust is non-active if, throughout the tax year, the trustee: ▪ has not derived or been deemed to derive any income ▪ has no deductions, and ▪ has not been a party to, or perpetuated or continued with, any transactions with assets of the trust that, during the tax year, give rise to income in any person’s hands or fringe benefits to any employee or former employee. Certain minimal amounts of income or deductions can be ignored in determining whether a trust is non-active. This includes: ▪ reasonable fees paid to professional trustees to administer the trust ▪ up to $200 of bank charges or other minimal administration costs in the tax year ▪ up to $200 of interest earned on trust assets in a bank account in the tax year, or  ▪ insurance, rates and other expenditure incidental to the occupation of a dwelling owned by the trust and incurred by the beneficiaries of the trust. Where a trust ceases to be a non-active trust, the Commissioner must be notified. The Commissioner retains the power to require a non-active trust to furnish a return, despite its non-active status. Law: TAA s 43B  ¶2-035 Filing requirement for a non-resident An individual who is regarded as non-resident for New Zealand income tax purposes must file a return of income (IR 3NR) showing all income derived from New Zealand. The exception is if nonresident withholding tax (NRWT) was imposed on that income and that tax is treated as a final tax (not all forms of NRWT tax are a final tax). The tax position relating to a non-resident is more fully described beginning at ¶26-400. If an individual is a New Zealand resident for income tax purposes for part of the tax year, the individual is required to file only an IR 3 (resident return) for the year.  ¶2-036 Agents and returns Filing requirements An agent may be required to furnish a return, make an assessment and satisfy all tax liabilities on behalf of a principal. The Commissioner may treat a relationship between two persons engaged in business as a principal and agency situation. This might arise through either overseas or local control of a New Zealand business actually conducted by another. Agency status for tax purposes is attributed in the following circumstances: ▪ A guardian or a manager of a person under disability. See s HD 9.  ▪ A mortgagee in possession of income derived on behalf of a mortgagor. See s HD 10. ▪ A nominated company in respect of a consolidated group or an imputation group. See s HD 11. ▪ A trustee for income of beneficiaries (excluding a beneficiary of a community trust). See ss HC 32 and HD 12(1). ▪ A settlor of income tax payable by the trustee. See ss HC 29 and HD 12(2). ▪ A trustee of a unit trust in relation to income of the unit trust. See s HD 13. ▪ A company using the AIM provisional tax method making tax payments for a shareholder-employee for the purposes of the residual income tax definition. See HD 13B. ▪ A debenture company in respect of income derived by debenture holders. See s HD 14(1). In practice, however, a debenture company is able to avoid agency tax responsibilities for resident debenture holders by supplying the Commissioner with the certified list provided for by s HD 14(2)–(6). ▪ A reconstituted company for outstanding tax of the original company. See s HD 15. With the Commissioner’s agreement, a principal and an agent may agree that the principal will furnish a return that the agent would otherwise be required to furnish (and make an assessment and satisfy any income tax liability the agent would otherwise be required to meet). See s HD 4. Sections HD 18–HD 30 deal with agents for absentees and nonresidents. Signing returns  A person need not personally fill out and sign the person’s own return. When a return is made by or on behalf of any person, it is deemed to have been made by the person or on the person’s authority unless the contrary is proved. See s 34 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The Commissioner will not accept a return signed by an agent if there is an added disclaimer attached, although she will have no objection to the addition of a disclaimer to the statement of financial position of unaudited financial statements. Law: IT07 ss HC 32, HD 3, HD 4, HD 6, HD 9–HD 15; TAA s 34  ¶2-037 Māori authority returns A Māori authority is required to furnish an income tax return, the investment income information for the payment of a distribution, and a Māori authority credit account return. See ¶24-335. Law: TAA ss 25I, 57, 69B, 70B, sch 6  ¶2-038 Third party service providers From 18 March 2019, amendments clarified the types of third party service providers (in addition to tax agents) that Inland Revenue (IR) may offer “special” or extended service offerings to in order to assist with their clients’ tax and social policy obligations, or with claiming entitlements to social policy assistance administered by IR. Provisions set out the eligibility requirements that a person must satisfy to be approved by IR as a “representative” or “nominated person”. IR may also withhold approval or disallow a person as a representative or nominated person when this action is necessary to protect the integrity of the tax system. Representatives Section 124D sets out that a person is eligible to be a representative if they: ▪ have signed authorities to act for 10 or more other persons in relation to their tax affairs, or in relation to their entitlements and  obligations arising under social policy that is administered by IR, and □ are in a business, occupation or employment in which they act on behalf of others in relation to their tax affairs or social policy entitlements and obligations □ are carrying on a professional public practice dealing in matters relating to tax and social policy assistance, or □ are in a business, occupation or employment in which they provide budget advisory services to other persons or claim entitlements to social policy assistance on behalf of other persons. IR must approve the person as a representative if it considers that the person meets the above requirements and that approving the person as a representative would not adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. Approval can be revoked if it is considered that the person does not meet the relevant eligibility requirements, or that continuing to allow the person to act as a representative for others would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. If the person applying to be a representative is not a natural person, they must provide the Commissioner with the names of the following: ▪ for companies, other than a closely held company, each person who has the duties of tax manager, chief financial officer, chief executive officer, or director ▪ for closely held companies, each shareholder ▪ for partnerships, each partner ▪ for unincorporated bodies, each member. If these names change, the person must notify the Commissioner within 12 months of the change.  The Commissioner may also request further information in relation to an application from any person applying and may obtain information relating to them from other persons. Nominated person A person may also nominate another person to act for them in relation to their tax affairs or social policy entitlements and obligations by informing the Commissioner and providing the following information: ▪ their name, contact address and tax file number ▪ the name of the nominated person and any other information that may lead the Commissioner to be satisfied about the identity of the nominated person ▪ the relevant tax types of social policy entitlements and obligations for which the nominated person intends to act for them, and ▪ the relevant start and end dates. If the person making the nomination is not a natural person, they must also provide the name and position of a natural person for them. IR may disallow a person’s status as another’s nominated person where continuing to allow the person to be a nominated person would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. In addition, the Commissioner may disallow a person’s status as a nominated person if the person is acting in a fee-earning or other professional capacity (ie as a tax agent) and continuing to allow the person to act as nominated person for another person would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. However, this does not apply if the person is acting as a nominated person on behalf of their spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner, or a relative within two degrees of relationship. Law: TAA ss 124D-124G  ¶2-050 Returns of partners, trustees and others Partners and partnerships Persons in partnership are required to make a joint return of their partnership income, and each partner must also make a separate return of the income derived from the partnership and from other sources. For these purposes, the partnership should complete form IR 7 and each individual partner should also complete form IR 3. See ¶2-015. A person deriving income from a joint venture, other than as a partner, must individually return his or her share of that income. Trustees A trustee is required to annually furnish a return of income derived as a trustee of a trust. Separate returns must be made when a person is trustee of more than one trust, even if the beneficiaries under those trusts are identical. Co-trustees must make a joint return of the income of the trust. However, non-active trusts may elect not to file a return. See ¶2-027. Changes made in December 2020 mean that, from the 2021–22 income year, trustees are required to provide information on the financial position of the trust as part of the trustee’s tax return. In addition, the Commissioner also has the power to request the information for certain prior years. Section 59BA of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides that the following information must be included as part of the trustee’s tax return for a tax year: ▪ a profit and loss statement and a statement of financial position ▪ the amount and nature of each settlement made on the trust ▪ the identifying information of each settlor who makes a settlement on the trust ▪ the amount of each distribution made by the trustee and the identifying information of the beneficiary who receives the distribution  ▪ the identifying information of each person having a power under the trust to appoint or dismiss a trustee, to add or remove a beneficiary, or to amend the deed, and ▪ any other information required by the Commissioner. For these purposes, a person’s identifying information is their name, date of birth, jurisdiction of tax residence, and tax file number and taxpayer identification number. Under s 59BAB, the Commissioner may also require a trustee to provide the relevant information for the trust for prior years (the 2014–15 to the 2020–21 income years) where such information exists. The intention behind the provision is to assist with assessing compliance with the change to the top tax rate from the 2021–22 year. Information for income years prior to 2021–22 is expected to assist in understanding and monitoring the changes in the use of structures and entities in response to the introduction of the 39% tax rate. If the trustee of a trust is a non-resident, a New Zealand resident settlor is responsible for ensuring the information is provided. These information provisions do not apply to the following: ▪ a non-active trust ▪ resident trustees of foreign trusts (who are already subject to the foreign trust disclosure rules) ▪ charitable trusts incorporated under the Charitable Trusts Act 1957, and ▪ trusts eligible to be a Māori authority. Special returns The Commissioner also has power to require any person to make a return considered necessary for the purposes of the Act. The Commissioner may require a return to be made relating to a particular transaction or transactions or for any particular period,  from an agent, a non-resident trader, a person who is believed to be about to leave the country or is discontinuing business or has ceased to derive income or is bankrupt, a company that is in liquidation, or the executors or administrators of a deceased estate in relation to the deceased’s taxable income for his or her lifetime. The Commissioner also has the power to require a non-active trust or a non-active company to file a tax return or an imputation return. These powers are not often used, but may be when the Commissioner considers that returns of income will not be made in the normal way. Special returns are required from a person whose taxable income or loss for the tax year is reduced by, or affected by a reduction in, the amount of a deduction under s DT 2 (arrangement for petroleum exploration expenditure and sale of property) or s DS 3 (clawback of deductions for film reimbursement schemes) of the Income Tax Act 2007. A special return is also required from a person making required adjustments under s EW 53 in relation to a financial arrangement designed to defeat the intention of the financial arrangements rules. See ¶6-550. Law: TAA ss 42, 43(2), 43A(7), 43B(5), 44, 44A, 44B, 79, 80  ¶2-055 Request for non-standard balance date Persons can apply to file tax returns on the basis of a corresponding income year that ends with their year-end. Any such application must be in writing and must fully state the reasons for the application. Generally, only a person carrying on a business will be given approval for a non-standard balance date. Any approved nonstandard balance date continues to apply until the person requests that it be altered. The corresponding income year for a tax year is an income year that ends in the period starting on 1 October in the tax year and ending on 30 September immediately after the tax year. A person with an early balance date files a return for a tax year on the basis of a corresponding income year that ends on a date between 1 October and the following 31 March (both days inclusive). For a  person with a late balance date, the corresponding income year ends on a date between 1 April and the following 30 September (both days inclusive). Example 1: Accounting year/Corresponding income year  Tax year  28 February 2019  31 March 2019  31 October 2019  31 March 2020  31 July 2020  31 March 2020  Example 2: TP Ltd has an approved non-standard balance date of 31 August. Income derived during the year ended 31 August 2019 will constitute the company’s income for the corresponding income year to the tax year ended 31 March 2019.  The Commissioner of Inland Revenue has the power to make any assessment considered to be necessary to give effect to the change in balance date. See also ¶2-065 and ¶2-070. The Commissioner has set out her practice for considering applications for consent to a change in balance date for income tax purposes in Standard Practice Statement, SPS 18/02, “Requests to change a balance date” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 4, May 2018 at 27). SPS 18/02 replaced the previous SPS 08/04. Retrospective elections Ideally, elections to change a balance date will be made, and the Commissioner’s consent received, before the commencement of a new income year, so taxpayers can avoid additional compliance costs should consent be withheld. The Commissioner’s practice is that late applications for a change of balance date will be accepted if made before the earlier of the return  filing date under s 37(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 for the current balance date and that for the proposed balance date, but does not include extension of time arrangements for filing returns. Consent will be provided where taxpayers can show that: ▪ it is possible to file returns for all the income years ▪ the late election was not made for reasons of tax deferral or tax avoidance, or to take undue advantage of any tax incentive or concession, and ▪ any incidental tax deferral as a consequence of the proposed balance date is only insignificant when compared with their tax liability for the year under their current balance date. Circumstances in which non-standard balance date approved The Commissioner normally allows a non-standard balance date, ie other than 31 March, in the following circumstances: ▪ The nature of the business makes a 31 March balance date impractical. ▪ The business wishes to align with an agreed industry balance date. For example, the following balance dates are commonly recognised: □ apiarists  30 November or 31 December  □ education/child care related services  31 December  □ farmers: cattle  31 May  — dairy  31 May, or 30 June, or 31 July  — sheep  30 June  □ fishing industries  30 September  □ horse breeders  31 July  □ kiwifruit orchardists  31 January, 28 February, or 31 March  □ meat processing and export  31 August, or 30 September  □ orchardists, pipfruit  31 March, or 30 June, or 31 December  □ seed dressers  30 November  □ tobacco growers  31 July  ▪ For shareholder-employees, when the date coincides with the balance date of the company in which they are major shareholders and from which they derive their main source of income. If they are major shareholders in more than one company, their balance date should be aligned to the balance date of the company that provides their main source of income. ▪ For subsidiary companies, when the date coincides with the balance date of a parent company (including an overseas parent), except when the change would result in a significant deferral of income. ▪ For business entities with a close working relationship, aligning balance dates where they share a common business/management accounting system or central administration structure and already have an approved nonstandard balance date. ▪ For managed funds, allowing them to adopt a balance date in common with a fund manager or trustee when it can be demonstrated that a parent-subsidiary like relationship exists between parties (excludes a multi-rate PIE that does not make payments of tax under s HM 44 of the Income Tax Act 2007). ▪ For entities deemed to be agents of non-resident insurers, allowing them to file “as agent” returns in terms of s HD 16  (excludes a multi-rate PIE that does not make payments of tax under s HM 44). ▪ For taxpayers that perform business activities in New Zealand that have a centre of management outside New Zealand (does not apply to passive investment income), allowing them to adopt a balance date applicable to a non-resident taxpayer’s tax jurisdiction. ▪ For continuing estates, when the date coincides with the date of death of the deceased taxpayer. ▪ For a previously tax exempt entity, allowing it to continue to use a balance date consistent with an existing date for financial reporting purposes. (For example, a charity that had only exempt income so was not previously required to file tax returns and is now required to file returns, may continue to use the nonstandard balance date they had used before entering the tax base.) ▪ Where a taxpayer can demonstrate that unreasonable or excessive compliance costs will be incurred if income has to be returned to 31 March. ▪ Where a franchisee is required as a condition of a franchise agreement to use a non-standard balance date for financial reporting purposes (where the applicable balance date has been recognised via an agreement between the Commissioner and the master franchisor). ▪ Where a taxpayer receives passive income as well as business income and wishes to adopt a non-standard balance date for returning their business income. When providing consent to a new balance date, the Commissioner will only agree to a balance date that is the last calendar day of a month, eg 30 November rather than 15 November — except for a  continuing estate that elects to adopt a balance date that coincides with a deceased taxpayer’s date of death. The Commissioner will not agree to a change in balance date when: ▪ the non-standard balance date is the anniversary date of the commencement of a business, unless it coincides with an agree industry balance date ▪ the reasons for the change is tax deferral, tax avoidance or to take advantage of any tax incentive or concession ▪ the request has been made to smooth out administrative workloads within the business or to smooth the workflow of a manager, trustee or tax agent ▪ the taxpayer has investment income and no direct involvement in a business activity ▪ functions have been contracted out to a third party (eg a specialist administration manager) and the taxpayer wishes to adopt the manager’s balance date ▪ a multi-rate PIE that does not make tax payments under s HM 44. The SPS also sets out how to make a request and the information that must accompany a request. The policy is summarised in ¶2-065–¶2-071. Reconciliation to 31 March still required Inland Revenue requires that salary, wages or schedular payments be reconciled to the tax year. A company is also required to report certain payments made to residents and non-residents at the time the company return is furnished. This information should relate to the tax year irrespective of the balance date of the company. Changes of balance date only apply to returns of business income.  Example 3: A taxpayer who derived both business income and salary and wages could not return the income from salary and wages for any particular year other than 31 March (ie the tax year) regardless of what other balance date the taxpayer returned business income. See Case K41 (1988) 10 NZTC 348.  Law: IT07 s YE 1; TAA ss 38, 39, 39B  ¶2-065 Change from standard to early balance date A person may change the return date to a date earlier than the original balance date. An early balance date refers to an accounting year with an annual balance date falling between 1 October and the following 31 March. If the new balance date is earlier in the calendar year than the original balance date, the person has a transitional year of the period from the original balance date up to and including the new balance date in the next succeeding calendar year. That is, the period covered in the first change for assessment purposes is always for a period less than 12 months and generally for a period of more than six months. Example: A 31 March balance date is to change to 31 January. The return for the 2017–18 income year will cover the period from 1 April 2017 to 31 January 2018 (a 10-month transitional year). The return for the 2018–19 income year will be from 1 February 2018 to 31 January 2019. Example from Appendix B to SPS 18/02 Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 4, May 2018 at 35.  Law: IT07 s YE 1; TAA s 39  ¶2-070 Change from standard to late balance date A person may change the return date to a date later than the original balance date. A late balance date refers to an accounting year with an annual balance date falling between 1 April and the following 30  September (inclusive of both days). If the new balance date is later in the calendar year than the original balance date the person has a transitional year of the period from the original balance date up to and including the new balance date in the same calendar year. For assessment purposes, this is always for a period greater than 12 months. Example: A 31 March balance date is to change to 30 June. The return for the 2017–18 income year will cover the period 1 April 2017 to 30 June 2018 (a 15-month transitional year). Example from Appendix B to SPS 18/02 Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 4, May 2018 at 35.  If the change in balance date results in the person having two periods combining to be the corresponding income year for a tax year, the figures for both periods are added together for assessment purposes; see Example 2 in ¶2-071. Law: IT07 s YE 1; TAA s 39  ¶2-071 Returns for less than six months or more than 18 months Transitional returns for periods relating to changes from or to the standard balance date are generally for periods of more than six months or less than 18 months. However, in some cases, returns are required for periods outside these boundaries. Returns for a period of longer than 18 months occur only when there is a change from an early balance date to a late balance date. By contrast, returns for a period shorter than six months occur only when there is a change from a late balance date to an early one. The Commissioner’s policy on the filing requirements in these situations is summarised by the following examples: Example 1:  In 2017, a customer changes from a balance date of 30 September to 30 November for the 2018 income year (transitional return year): 1 October 2016–30 September 2017  2016–17 income year  1 October 2017–30 November 2017  two-month period within the 2017–18 income year (transitional return year)  1 December 2017–30 November 2018 2018–19 income year In this case, it is not possible to include the income derived during the two-month period in the 2017–18 income year with other income derived in the same income year, because there is no other income derived during the 2017–18 income year. The taxpayer must file a two-month transitional return for the 2018 income year.  Example 2: In 2016, a customer changes from a balance date of 30 November to 31 July for the 2017–18 income year (transitional return year): 1 December 2015–30 November 2016  2016–17 income year  1 December 2016–31 July 2017  eight-month period within the 2016–17 income year (transitional return year)  1 August 2017–31 July 2018  2017–18 income year  The legislation requires the customer to add the income derived during the transitional period to other income derived in the same income year. Therefore, the customer must add the income derived in the eight-month period from 1 December 2016 to 31 July 2017 to the income derived in the period from 1 December 2015 to 30 November 2016, giving a return for a 20-month period for the 2017 income year. Examples from Appendix B to SPS 18/02 Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 4, May 2018 at 36.  ¶2-075 Adjustments required when balance date changed Average rate of tax Upon the adoption of a new balance date, a return will be prepared for a period of more or less than 12 months. The taxpayer must calculate an average tax rate and this is used as the basic tax rate for calculating the person’s income tax liability for the transitional year. The calculation of this average tax rate is based on an  annualised amount of business taxable income plus other income, such as wages. This annualisation is necessary because a transition year will either be shorter or longer than a 12-month period. A person must determine: ▪ the amount of income from activities (net of allowable deductions, if any) that are unrelated to the changed balance date ▪ the annualised amount of income (net of allowable deductions) from those business activities for which the Commissioner has agreed the new balance date, and ▪ the average tax rate on the aggregate of those two amounts. Example: Transition year greater than 12 months Bob, a partner in Bobbin & Co, sought a change in the balance date for the partnership from 31 March to 31 May. Approval for the change was given on 14 Dec 2019 for the 2020 tax year. A return of income is filed for the period 1 April 2019 to 31 May 2020 (427 days, as 2020 is a leap year). Bob’s share of the partnership income for the 14 months to 31 May 2020 (2020 tax year) is $100,000. Unrelated to the change in balance date, he also derives interest and dividends for the 12 months to 31 March 2020 (2020 tax year) of $200,000. Bob must calculate the average tax rate on the following amount: $200,000 + ($100,000 × 366 ÷ 427) = $285,714 Using the marginal rates of tax from Sch 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (based on the rates for the 2017–18 tax year and assuming no change in rates), the income tax payable on this annualised amount of taxable income for the 2020 tax year is $85,205.62. The basic tax rate is calculated as equal to the average rate of tax on that annualised income, as follows: $85,205.62 ÷ $285,714 = 29.82% The income tax liability for the 2020 tax year is therefore calculated using this basic tax rate: ($200,000 + $100,000) × 29.82% = $89,460 In the absence of s 39, the income tax liability on $300,000 would be $89,920 (ie overtaxed). Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 157.  Overseas income New Zealand resident persons may elect to return certain overseas income in the New Zealand tax year in which their balance date in the overseas jurisdiction falls. See ¶26-032. Adjustments where no change of balance date The provisions of s 39 of the Tax Administration Act do not apply if there has not been a change of balance date in terms of s 38 of the Act. For example, the first return of income of a person who has not previously been required to file a tax return and carries on business is made from the commencement of that business to the following 31 March or other approved balance date. Although such returns are for a period of less than 12 months, the Commissioner cannot apply the provisions of s 39 to reduce the annual tax rate for income. Also, if a balance date other than 31 March has been approved for a person who has never been liable to furnish returns, s 39 cannot be applied to adjust the tax rate. That section only applies to changes of existing balance dates. A person who has not previously been required to file a tax return does not have an existing balance date to change. Law: TAA ss 38, 39  ¶2-080 Return for less than 12 months A return for a period of less than 12 months may be required in the following instances: ▪ return of income of newly deceased individual to date of death if the deceased would have been required to file a return had he or she remained alive (see ¶25-525) ▪ first return of trustee or estate income from inception of trust to following 31 March (sometimes the Commissioner will agree to the trust’s or the deceased’s special balance date instead) ▪ a person who has not previously been required to file a tax return (in particular when a business has just been started) often  needs to file a return covering income derived from part way through the year to the following 31 March ▪ a liquidated company or a finally distributed trust require a return of income to that date from the preceding 1 April ▪ change to an “earlier” balance date (see ¶2-065 and ¶2-071), or ▪ amalgamation of two or more companies under the Companies Act 1993 (see ¶20-085 and s 76(b) of the Tax Administration Act 1994).  ¶2-090 Late filing penalties and non-electronic filing penalties Late filing penalties are imposed on a person who: ▪ fails to provide certain returns (see below), reconciliation statements (where relevant) or employment income information on time, and ▪ is notified by the Commissioner that the penalty is payable. Late filing penalties are chargeable on the following returns: ▪ annual tax returns (which includes returns by persons who receive family assistance, who have tax credits for charitable gifts, partnership returns, returns by owners of interests in lookthrough companies, and returns by executors or administrators) ▪ annual ICA returns ▪ ACC reconciliation statements ▪ returns required by multi-rate PIEs or proxies for investors in the PIEs ▪ statements for payment of residential land withholding tax (RLWT), and  ▪ employment income information. See further at ¶14-040. A late filing penalty may also be imposed on GST returns filed after their due dates. See ¶32-223. Non-electronic filing penalty There is also a penalty, known as a non-electronic filing penalty, for those employers, PAYE intermediaries, portfolio investment entities and, from 1 April 2020, investment income payers that are required to file returns electronically but fail to do so. See further at ¶14-045. Both these penalties will themselves be subject to the late payment penalty and interest if they are not paid by the due date. Law: TAA ss 139A, 139AAA, 139AA  ¶2-095 Addresses to send tax returns, payments and correspondence Inland Revenue has processing centres to which tax payments, tax returns and correspondence can be mailed. See www.ird.govt.nz for the relevant addresses. For tax payments, see ¶2-115.  CALCULATION OF TAX ¶2-105 Calculation and satisfaction of tax liability New Zealand income tax is imposed on the worldwide income (subject to some exceptions) of all New Zealand residents whether they are companies or individuals. Income tax is also imposed on New Zealand-sourced income of non-residents, although the liability may be reduced by the provision of a double tax agreement. The method for determining a person’s income tax liability is dealt with by s BC 1. This section makes a distinction between:  ▪ a non-filing taxpayer (income tax liability is the total tax withheld from annual gross income) ▪ a filing taxpayer (income tax liability calculated under ss BC 2– BC 6), and ▪ a filing taxpayer with schedular income (income tax liability calculation is modified by s BC 7). The tax liability for each class of person is appropriately defined. The person’s income tax liability will be satisfied by crediting any tax paid or withheld, or by the payment of terminal tax. Satisfaction of the income tax liability of the person for the income year is addressed by s BC 8. That provision states that the liability may be satisfied by crediting any tax paid or withheld for a tax year. If the credits are insufficient to satisfy the total amount of the income tax liability, the person must pay terminal tax. Filing taxpayers The following diagram in subpart BC illustrates the process used by filing taxpayers to calculate taxable income under ss BC 2–BC 6.  Annual gross income The annual gross income of a person for a tax year is the total of the amounts of assessable income under s BD 1 that are allocated to the corresponding income year. This proposition is stated by s BC 2. Determination of annual gross income is a step in ascertaining the person’s income tax liability for the income year. Assessable income Assessable income is income that is not exempt income, excluded income or non-residents’ foreign-sourced income; see further at ¶1055. Assessable income is described in s BD 1, and allocation to income years is dealt with by s BD 3. Annual total deduction Section BC 3 provides that a person’s annual total deduction for a tax year is the total of the deductions that are allocated to the corresponding income year. Deductions are described in s BD 2 and allocation to income years is dealt with by s BD 4. Net income and tax loss A person’s net income or tax loss for a tax year is defined by s BC 4. Where a person’s annual gross income is more than their annual total deduction, the difference is the person’s net income. It is also recognised that net income for the income year can be zero. This is where the person’s annual gross income equals annual total deduction. An example of where this can occur is where profits and losses are offset within a group of companies. A person’s tax loss for the income year arises when their annual total deduction is more than their annual gross income. The difference is the person’s tax loss for the tax year with the person having a net income of zero. The treatment of a tax loss is that the person includes it under Pt I in their tax loss for the tax year that may be:  ▪ subtracted from net income in a future tax year ▪ made available to another person to subtract from that person’s present or future net income, or ▪ used in other ways. Taxable income The taxable income of a person for a tax year is determined by subtracting any available tax losses of the person in accordance with Pt I from the person’s net income. See s BC 5. An available tax loss will be a loss balance carried forward from an earlier tax year or the tax loss of another company allowed to be subtracted from net income. Deduction of the loss is the final step in determining taxable income. Non-filing taxpayer The definition of the income tax liability for a tax year of a non-filing taxpayer is contained within s BC 1(1). The liability is the total of the tax withheld from income included in the taxpayer’s annual gross income for the year. In other words, tax deducted at source becomes the year’s tax liability. The concept of a non-filing taxpayer is defined in s YA 1. It refers to: ▪ a non-resident entertainer whose only New Zealand-sourced income is from schedular payments and who chooses not to file a return ▪ a non-resident who pays non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) as a final tax, or ▪ a person whose only New Zealand-sourced income is derived as a non-resident seasonal worker. Filing taxpayer with schedular income The income tax liability for an income year of a filing taxpayer with schedular income is determined in accordance with ss BC 1(3) and  BC 7. A distinction is drawn between a person with one type of schedular income and multiple types of schedular income. The person must calculate an income tax liability for each class of schedular income as if each category was the person’s only income. The income tax so calculated is added to the tax on income that is not schedular income (as discussed above) to give the income tax liability for the tax year. The concept of schedular income is defined (in s YA 1) to mean income of the following types: ▪ schedular policyholder base income of a life insurer ▪ category A income of a group investment fund ▪ income of a multi-rate PIE or a portfolio tax rate entity ▪ with effect from 1 April 2020, attributed PIE income derived by a natural person investor in a multi-rate PIE ▪ non-resident passive income for which NRWT is a final tax ▪ income of a non-resident general insurer that is not a company ▪ income of a non-resident shipper, and ▪ income of Lloyd’s of London from life insurance premiums. The feature common to these classes of income is that they are dealt with in a specific manner such as being subject to separate return requirements or to different tax rates. This makes it necessary to preserve the separate identity of these classes of income. The income tax liability for a tax year of a person who has any schedular income is stated by s BC 7 to be the total of: ▪ the person’s schedular income tax liability for the year, and ▪ the amount that would be their income tax liability for the year if the person had no schedular income.  If the person has one type of schedular income, the person’s schedular income tax liability is the tax liability on that schedular income. If the person has multiple types of schedular income, the schedular income tax liability is the total income tax liabilities calculated on each class of schedular income. For example, s RB 3 states that tax for each class of non-resident passive income that is schedular income must be calculated in accordance with the formula set out in that section. Law: IT07 subpart BC, ss RB 3, YA 1  ¶2-110 Determination of income tax liability The determination of a person’s income tax liability follows the steps set out in s BC 6. The following diagram illustrates the process used by persons (except non-filing taxpayers) to calculate income tax liability. Section BC 6: income tax liability of filing taxpayer  Section BC 6(1) states that the income tax liability for a tax year of a filing taxpayer is the amount calculated by multiplying taxable income for the tax year by the basic tax rate. The “basic tax rate” is defined in s YA 1 to mean:  ▪ the basic rate of income tax for the person under sch 1 (basic tax rates: income tax, employer’s superannuation contribution tax (ESCT), retirement scheme contribution tax (RSCT), resident withholding tax (RWT) and attributed fringe benefits) and sch 2 (basic tax rates for pay as you earn (PAYE) income payments), and ▪ the basic rate of income tax under sch 1 apportioned on a time basis in the case of a person filing a return in accordance with s 39 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 ie in a transitional year on a change of balance date (see example in ¶2-075). Satisfaction of income tax liability Once a person has determined their tax liability in accordance with s BC 6, the liability is first satisfied by total tax credits available and then through the payment of terminal tax. Generally, tax credits are an allowance for tax paid or withheld at some other time during the relevant tax year. A person has terminal tax for a tax year in which their tax liability exceeds their total tax credits as determined in accordance with Pt L (credits). The amount of the terminal tax is the difference between the two. To satisfy the person’s income tax liability, the terminal tax must be paid. The following example illustrates the situation where a person’s income tax liability exceeds total tax credits. Example 1: In the 2016–17 income year, Mrs Green derives income of $29,500 of which $28,750 is salary income and $750 is interest from bank deposits. Mrs Green’s tax is: $  $  Annual gross income Salary Gross interest received  28,750.00 750.00  Equals net and taxable income  29,500.00  Multiplied by basic tax rate Equals income tax liability  4,182.50  Less refundable credits: PAYE deductions (excluding ACC earner levy)  3,990  RWT withheld by bank ($750 @ 17.5%)  131.25 4,121.25  Equals terminal tax  61.25  This example adapted from an example prepared by Clinton R Alley, Senior Lecturer, Department of Accounting and Finance, University of Waikato.  Treatment of excess credits In some instances, credits may exceed the income tax liability for the tax year. In that event, specific rules apply to determine how the credits are utilised: ▪ the excess credits are first set off in accordance with s LA 4, and ▪ any remaining tax credit is dealt with in accordance with s LA 5. Section LA 4 provides that the person’s credits are to be treated as if they were set off against the person’s income tax liability in the following order: ▪ non-refundable tax credits ▪ tax credits for supplementary dividends ▪ tax credits for imputation credits ▪ carried forward R&D tax credits  ▪ R&D tax credits, and ▪ refundable credits. Non-refundable tax credits include credits such as the independent earner tax credit, tax credits for payroll donations, and tax credits for foreign income tax paid. The policy behind the ordering rules above is to allow maximum credit for foreign taxes and other amounts that are capped at the level of domestic income tax liability. Any remaining tax credits after applying the above ordering rules (other than refundable tax credits) are dealt with as follows: ▪ non-refundable tax credits are extinguished (with a few exceptions) ▪ tax credits for supplementary dividends may be made available to another company in the same wholly-owned group ▪ imputation credits are either carried forward or converted to losses ▪ R&D tax credits are refunded to a specified maximum or carried forward. Excess imputation credits received Excess imputation credits received by the following taxpayers are converted to a loss and carried forward: ▪ a company (that is not a life insurer) ▪ a trustee (other than a Māori trustee) ▪ a Māori authority ▪ a life insurer (but only for imputation credits to the extent to which the amount is for their shareholder base).  The conversion rates are set out below: Taxpayer  Conversion rate  Company  28  Trustee (other than a Māori trustee)  33  Māori authority  17.5  Life insurer (for shareholder base)  28  For taxpayers who do not fall under any of these groups (for example, individuals), the excess imputation credits received for an income year are carried forward as a credit of tax to the next income year and so on, until it is extinguished by the Commissioner when outstanding tax is written off (see ¶2-119) or it is used up. See ¶17010 for a worked example. A group company with excess imputation credits may offset the loss arising on conversion wholly or partly against the net income of another group company in the income year that the excess imputation credits arise. To claim a credit, the person is required to furnish the shareholder dividend statement (or other sufficient evidence in writing) indicating the imputation credits claimed. The Commissioner has the power to disallow a credit of tax (in whole or in part) for imputation credits received if: ▪ she is satisfied that the imputation credit claimed is in respect of insufficient income tax or further income tax having been paid by the company that issued the credit, and ▪ it would be inappropriate for the person to be allowed the credit. The disallowance is made in a manner that the Commissioner considers fair and equitable. However, if sufficient income tax or further income tax is subsequently paid by or on behalf of the company, the credit will be allowed to the extent of that payment.  Claims for credits of tax for imputation credits received that are in excess of the proper amount are not allowed to the extent of the excess. Refundable tax credits Refundable tax credits include credits for PAYE, provisional tax paid, RWT, Working for Families tax credits, non-resident withholding tax (NRWT), RSCT, RLWT, Māori Authority tax credits, and certain tax credits in relation to multi-rate PIEs. The Commissioner is required to apply the amount of any remaining refundable tax credits in accordance with specific ordering rules outlined in s LA 6(2). Ordering rules With the exception of NRWT credits, tax credits under the Working for Families scheme and tax credits for charitable donations, refundable tax credits must be applied in the following order: ▪ towards previous tax years’ unpaid tax liability (if any) and, if this amount exceeds the tax credit available, to the extent of the available credit ▪ towards unpaid tax liability for the following tax year or years (if any) ▪ towards unpaid provisional tax for the following tax year or years (if any) ▪ as tax paid in excess that can be transferred to other tax types of other taxpayers ▪ with effect from 1 April 2018, for a company using the accounting income method (AIM) of paying provisional tax, towards the provisional tax liabilities of the AIM company’s shareholders, and ▪ as a refund of tax, subject to ss RB 4, RM 2–RM 8, and RM 10.  Tax credits under the Working for Families scheme and tax credits for charitable donations are either treated as refundable or as tax paid in excess which can be transferred. NRWT credits must be treated, firstly, as tax paid in excess that can be transferred, and secondly, as refundable to the taxpayer. Example 2: Calculation and satisfaction of income tax liability Q Ltd is a small New Zealand company that specialises in technology development and also holds a number of investments. The company’s results for the 2016–17 tax year are as follows: $000s Income from technology projects  4,000  Income from Government stock investments (no RWT: exemption certificate held) Dividends received (including imputation credits of $28,000)  100 100  Expenditure related to technology projects  (3,000)  General expenses  (50)  Notes: ▪ Q Ltd has $150,000 of losses carried forward from a prior year that are able to be utilised in the 2016–17 tax year, and ▪ Q Ltd paid provisional tax of $250,000 for the 2016–17 tax year. Using the steps set out in the core provisions, the calculation and satisfaction of Q Ltd’s income tax liability for the 2016–17 tax year can be demonstrated as follows: $000s  $000s  Assessable income: income from technology projects  4,000  Government stock investment income (calculated under the financial arrangements rules and allocated to the 2016–17 tax year)  100  dividends received (including imputation credits)  100  Annual gross income  4,200  Deductions: technology expenditure general expenses  3,000 50  Annual total deduction  3,050  Net income  1,150  less: available tax losses  (150) Taxable income  1,000  Income tax liability  280  less: non-refundable credits  nil  credits in respect of supplementary dividends  nil  imputation credits of $28,000  (28)  refundable credits: RWT (no RWT: exemption certificate held) provisional tax paid  nil (250)  Terminal tax liability  2  Example adapted and reproduced from Tax Education Office Newsletter No 124, November 1996 at 9, with permission from the TEO.  Law: IT07 subparts LA, LE, ss BC 6, BC 8, IA 2(4)(b), RA 3, YA 1  ¶2-112 Correcting a tax return Generally, once it is filed, a tax return cannot be amended or corrected by filing an amended return. However, under s 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 the Commissioner is granted a broad  discretion to amend assessments to ensure their correctness, or following the application of the dispute resolution process. In Westpac Securities NZ Ltd v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-118, the High Court held that where a taxpayer in error adopts a correct but disadvantageous tax position, the Commissioner has the power under s 113 to correct the taxpayer’s assessment so as to negate that disadvantage by adopting another correct tax position. However, the Court said that whether the Commissioner considers her discretionary power should be exercised in that way was a matter outside the scope of the judgment and was therefore a matter for the Commissioner. Standard practice statement on amending assessments Standard practice statement SPS 20/03, “Requests to amend assessments” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 11), sets out how the Commissioner will exercise her discretion to amend an assessment of income tax or goods and services tax (GST), without having to go through the disputes resolution process (see ¶4-130–¶4-232). The statement provides both direction to those Inland Revenue staff delegated to use the discretion in s 113, and guidance to taxpayers and their advisors in formulating requests for amendments. The statement replaced the previous statement, SPS 16/01, from 2 June 2020. In considering s 113 requests, the Commissioner must be assured that the amendment the taxpayer seeks will ensure the assessment is correct when amended, even if it was also correct beforehand. If a request is made to correct an arithmetic, transposition or keying error made by either the taxpayer or Commissioner, the correction will be made without further consideration. Where the Commissioner is not initially convinced that the amendment requested will result in a correct assessment, a decision must be made to commit Inland Revenue’s limited resources to considering the request further. In that case, the Commissioner will consider factors such as:  ▪ whether the taxpayer is attempting to circumvent the statutory disputes procedure ▪ whether the subject-matter of the request could apply to other taxpayers ▪ how similar requests have been treated ▪ whether the request is a voluntary disclosure ▪ whether the taxpayer took their original position relying on advice from the Commissioner ▪ whether there has been a delay in making the request ▪ the size of the proposed amendment ▪ the taxpayer’s compliance history, and ▪ any other considerations relevant to a particular case. Where it is decided to apply additional resources (which the statement states will most often be the case), the merits of the request are then considered. When the Commissioner is satisfied, the amendment requested will lead to the making of a correct assessment, that assessment will be made unless a relatively rare circumstance exists that suggests that, on balance, the integrity of the tax system will be undermined. These circumstances can include, for example: ▪ where the request is, or is part of, a tax avoidance arrangement ▪ where a taxpayer requests the Commissioner to amend an assessment from one correct tax position to another position that is also correct. Requests to correct obvious errors, such as arithmetic, transposition and keying errors, may be made to Inland Revenue by telephone or in writing.  Requests to amend returns where the tax effect of the amendment requested is $10,000 or less may generally be made by telephone or in writing. Where the tax effect is greater than $10,000, the request must be made in writing. Where a taxpayer makes an amendment request, all relevant information to support the request must be provided, including: ▪ the tax types and periods containing the tax position the taxpayer wishes to amend ▪ the decrease in tax liability that will result from any amendment (a request that results in an increase in tax liability is a voluntary disclosure and is dealt with under SPS 19/02, see ¶14-130) ▪ a description of the original tax position, including the background circumstances and reasons the original tax position was taken ▪ the nature of the amendment, including any relevant tax laws ▪ how and why the need for the amendment was identified ▪ where relevant, details of any incorrect advice given directly to the taxpayer by Inland Revenue and how the taxpayers relied on that advice ▪ the action required to ensure correctness ▪ all other relevant documents and records or other information supporting the amendment request, and ▪ whether the taxpayer is aware of any relevant view published by the Commissioner and the extent to which the taxpayer’s amended tax position is consistent with that published view. Interest and penalties Notice is provided to the taxpayer where a request for amendment leads to a fresh tax liability or increases an existing tax liability.  Interest applies to any tax that has been underpaid or overpaid as a result of a genuine error. A shortfall penalty may be applied if the taxpayer has not met the requisite standards of care. See ¶14-100. Correcting minor errors in later returns If a person’s income tax, fringe benefit tax or GST assessment or return contains one or more errors and the total tax discrepancy caused by the error or errors is $1,000 or less, then the person is allowed to rectify the error or errors in the next return due after discovering them under s 113A. In addition, a person may also rectify an error or errors in a subsequent return if, for that person, the error or errors are not material errors. For these purposes, the error or errors are not material if the total tax discrepancy caused by the error or errors in the return is equal to or less than the lower of $10,000 and 2% of the person’s annual gross income or GST output tax, as applicable. However, note that a person will not be able to correct an error if they have applied the materiality threshold for the main purpose of delaying the payment of tax. SPS 20/03 discusses the relationship between ss 113 and 113A, and states that while the Commissioner is not prevented from exercising the discretion under s 113 where the taxpayer is able to make the required correction themselves in a later period, the Commissioner’s practice is generally not to expend resources in these circumstances. The taxpayer does not need to request that the Commissioner amend an assessment under s 113 to make the correction. However, in certain circumstances, the Commissioner will exercise the discretion under s 113, notwithstanding that the taxpayer is able to make the required correction using s 113A. For example, this may occur where a taxpayer has made a final return and there is no future return in which to make an adjustment, or where not correcting the error in the earlier period using s 113 will negatively impact an entitlement of the taxpayer, such as a Working for Families tax credit entitlement. Law: TAA ss 113, 113A  PAYMENT OF TAX ¶2-115 Method of payment of tax Payment of tax may be made in a number of ways. This includes making payments electronically through Internet banking, direct debit or by using a credit or debit card (Visa or Mastercard). Alternatively, payments can be made by cash or EFTPOS at any branch of Westpac. Sufficient details must be included to enable the payment to be credited to the correct income year and tax type. From 1 March 2020, Inland Revenue (IR) no longer accepts cheques as a form of payment except in exceptional circumstances. When payment received in time Standard practice statement SPS 20/04, “Tax payments — when received in time” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 4, August 2020 at 81) sets out when the Commissioner of Inland Revenue considers a tax payment to be received in time. It applies from 1 July 2020 and replaced SPS 20/01 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 2, March 2020 at 9), which applied from 5 February 2020 and replaced SPS 19/01. Standard practice statement SPS 20/04 is summarised below. Electronic payments Customers are encouraged to make payments electronically, including by internet banking. Payments by this method minimises delays and includes formal notification of the date and time the payment was made to IR. A payment will be received in time if it has been electronically paid or direct credited into an IR account either on or before the due date. If a customer wishes to future-date an electronic payment, the “my tax payment” option is available on all major New Zealand banks’ internet banking services.  Customers who are registered for myIR can set up direct debits (except for child support, KiwiSaver member and tax pooling payments). A direct debit payment will be received in time when the direct debit transaction is made on or before the New Zealand due date. Tax agents who are registered for myIR can set up instalment arrangements and one-off payments on behalf of their clients (who are registered for myIR) by direct debit on a condition that the client has authorised this action. Overseas payments A payment will be received in time when it has been electronically paid or direct credited into an IR account either on or before the New Zealand due date. Debit/credit cards Customers can make payment by using a Visa or Mastercard debit/credit card over the phone, through the payment page on IR’s website for all revenues, and through myIR, their secure online service. A convenience fee of 1.42% is payable (charged by the banks) on all debit/credit card tax payments made within New Zealand. This fee also applies to debit/credit card tax payments from overseas, except for child support debt and student loan repayments where IR pays the convenience fee. A debit/credit card payment will be received in time when it has been paid or direct credited into an IR account on or before the New Zealand due date. Westpac over-the-counter payments Payments cannot be accepted at an IR office. Customers may make over-the-counter payments at branches of Westpac. (Note that while payment may be made at Westpac branches, Westpac is not authorised to accept returns. Returns may be filed electronically, posted to IR or delivered to an IR office.) From 1 July 2020, customers making over-the-counter payments at a Westpac branch must either include a barcode obtained from letters, returns and statements issued by IR, or create a barcode through IR’s website payment page to provide clear payment  instructions. A separate barcode is required for each individual tax type payable and tax period. Customers with a Westpac bank account may also pay (cash or EFTPOS) via Westpac Smart ATMs, provided they also use a barcode issued by IR or generated online. Payments made at Westpac are received in time if they are made on or before the due date. The cut off time for a payment made at an ATM is 9PM. Any payment made after this will go in the banking file on the next business day. Payments by cheque Since 1 March 2020, IR has no longer accepted cheques as a method for payment of tax. Customers are expected to explore and use other bank services available for making payments. The Commissioner may agree in exceptional circumstances to continue to receive a payment by cheque where a customer is unable to pay by any other means. Customers who consider that none of the other options for paying tax is practicable for them should contact the Commissioner explaining why they cannot use one of the current options and so wish to continue to pay their tax using cheques. Each situation will be considered on a customer’s individual circumstances. Where the Commissioner’s agreement has been given to make cheque payments, cheques must be received on or before the due date irrespective of whether they are posted from within New Zealand or from overseas. Cheque payments will be accepted as being received in time if delivered to an IR office on or before the close of business on the due date. Post-dated cheques have not been accepted since 1 March 2020. Weekends and public holidays If a due date falls on a weekend or a public holiday (including a provincial anniversary day), a payment will be in time if it is received at a Westpac branch or an IR bank account on or before the next working day. The treatment for a provincial anniversary day only  applies to those customers located in the relevant province who usually make tax payments in person over the counter at Westpac and so are unable to make payment on that day. Tax pooling In cases of tax pooling, the date of payment to IR is triggered when the tax pooling deposit is transferred into the taxpayer’s account. The effective date of the transfer can be no earlier than the date the deposit was received by IR. Income Equalisation Scheme (IES) deposits and primary sector business customers Customers may make IES deposits via their online banking Pay Tax facility, by credit card and direct debit.  ¶2-119 Financial relief for the payment of outstanding tax Detailed rules on the Commissioner’s powers to collect outstanding tax and to write off tax debt, and on the circumstances in which a person may seek financial relief for the payment of outstanding tax are contained in ss 176–177CA of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The underlying policy to these rules is to avoid a person being placed in “serious hardship” as a result of having outstanding tax debt. “Outstanding tax” means tax that is payable before or after a due date. General duty The Commissioner has a duty to maximise the recovery of outstanding tax from a taxpayer. However, action for recovery must not be taken if it is an inefficient use of the Commissioner’s resources or if it would place a natural person taxpayer in serious hardship. See s 176 of the TAA. Note, however, that the Commissioner can still take steps to bankrupt taxpayers who are facing serious hardship. Inland Revenue (IR) considers that bankrupting a taxpayer does not place the taxpayer in serious hardship as the taxpayer’s affairs are taken over  by the Official Assignee who ensures they do not suffer serious hardship. In Raynel v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,583, the High Court ruled that the general duty in s 176 of the TAA does not override the Commissioner’s duty to collect the highest net revenue over time (see ¶1-512 and ¶1-520). The case is discussed in CCH, New Zealand Tax Updater, No 6, July 2004. See also Clarke v C of IR, Money v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,165 and McLean v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,231. A discussion of these cases is included in CCH, New Zealand Tax Planning Report, No 2, June 2005 at 14. Financial relief A taxpayer, or a person on a taxpayer’s behalf, may request financial relief by either: ▪ making a claim of serious hardship (the Commissioner may request this application to be made in writing), or ▪ requesting an instalment arrangement. Upon receiving the request, the Commissioner may: ▪ accept the taxpayer’s request ▪ seek further information from the taxpayer ▪ make a counter offer, or ▪ decline the taxpayer’s request. If further information is sought from the taxpayer or a counter offer is made, the taxpayer has 20 working days to respond. Information provided or a response made outside this period is treated as a new request for financial relief. The 20-working-day period may be extended at the Commissioner’s discretion. See s 177 of the TAA. The Commissioner’s decision under s 177 cannot be challenged; see Gilchrist v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,094.  In W v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,602, the High Court ordered the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to reconsider and determine a taxpayer’s application for financial relief. In this case, the taxpayer fell behind in his tax affairs after he suffered a severe psychotic episode. The taxpayer applied for financial relief under s 177. The Commissioner declined the relief requested. The taxpayer applied for judicial review of the Commissioner’s decision. The High Court held that the question of whether serious hardship is established involves the application of the statutory test in s 177 to the individual case of a particular taxpayer. If serious hardship is made out, there is a statutory prohibition on the recovery of outstanding tax to the extent that that recovery would place the taxpayer in serious hardship. It was further held that the Commissioner failed to adequately address the essential questions that the taxpayer’s application for financial relief involved, ie whether serious hardship, as defined in s 177A, had been established and whether recovery of outstanding tax beyond the extent offered in the proposal would place the taxpayer in serious hardship. Serious hardship Section 177A of the TAA provides the rules for determining whether recovery of outstanding tax would place a taxpayer in serious hardship. The Commissioner must determine whether the financial information shows the taxpayer would likely have significant financial difficulties because, after the request: ▪ the taxpayer would likely be unable to meet — □ minimum living expenses estimated according to normal community standards □ the cost of medical treatment for an illness or injury of the taxpayer or his or her dependant □ the cost of education for their dependant ▪ the taxpayer or their dependant has a serious illness ▪ other factors the Commissioner thinks relevant would likely arise.  Factors that gave rise to the outstanding tax debt will not be considered by IR when determining whether payment of the debt will place a taxpayer in serious hardship (although such factors may be relevant at the next step of determining what action to take). Serious hardship should be assessed at the time the application for financial relief is made. This overturns an earlier Court of Appeal decision, in Larmer v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-043 (CA), in which it had been held that serious hardship could be assessed at the time the relevant tax became payable. Instalment arrangements The Commissioner must not enter into an instalment arrangement with a taxpayer or a relief company if that arrangement would place the taxpayer in serious hardship. A relief company is one in which the taxpayer owns, or the taxpayer and one other person jointly own, 50% or more of the shares, or a close company in which the taxpayer is a shareholder-employee. Approval A request to enter into an instalment arrangement may be declined if: ▪ to do so would not maximise the recovery of outstanding tax from the taxpayer ▪ the Commissioner considers that the taxpayer is in a position to pay all of the outstanding tax immediately ▪ the taxpayer is being frivolous or vexatious, or ▪ the taxpayer has not met all obligations under a previous instalment arrangement. Renegotiation A taxpayer may renegotiate an instalment arrangement at any time. The Commissioner may renegotiate an instalment arrangement at any time after the end of two years from the date on which the  instalment arrangement was entered into. Renegotiation of an instalment arrangement is treated as if it were a new request for financial relief. Cancellation The Commissioner may cancel an instalment arrangement if: ▪ it was entered into on the basis of false or misleading information provided by the taxpayer, or ▪ the taxpayer is not meeting his or her obligations under the arrangement. See s 177B of the TAA. If an instalment arrangement is entered into and the taxpayer is bankrupt or is a company that is in the course of being liquidated, the amount outstanding under the instalment arrangement must be included in IR’s proof of debt. See s 177CA of the TAA. Writing off tax debt The Commissioner may write off outstanding tax that cannot be recovered. However, underpaid income tax arising from an abusive tax position or evasion or similar act plus any shortfall penalty imposed in relation to that tax cannot be written off. See Rogerson v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,260. Outstanding tax that cannot be recovered must be written off in cases of bankruptcy or liquidation, or if a taxpayer’s estate has been distributed. The Commissioner may use the fact that the recovery of outstanding tax of a taxpayer or a relief company would place the taxpayer, being a natural person, in serious hardship as a ground for deciding whether to write off the outstanding tax. However, the Commissioner is not required to write off the outstanding tax simply because that ground exists. Outstanding tax written off in the above circumstances may be reinstated in whole or in part if the Commissioner receives, by  operation of law, additional funds in respect of a taxpayer after the taxpayer becomes bankrupt or is liquidated, or if additional funds due to the taxpayer’s estate are discovered after the taxpayer’s estate has been distributed. Reversal The Commissioner may reverse a write-off if: ▪ outstanding tax is written off on the grounds of serious hardship and the natural person taxpayer whose debt has been written off declares bankruptcy or is subject to bankruptcy proceedings brought by a creditor within a year of the write-off ▪ outstanding tax is written off on the grounds of serious hardship and the taxpayer that has had its debt written off is a relief company that is, or is in the course of, being liquidated within a year of the write-off, or ▪ the outstanding tax was written off due to false or misleading information provided by the taxpayer. Outstanding tax written off under an instalment arrangement may not be reversed even if, during the term of the arrangement, the taxpayer does not meet all of its terms. Losses and tax credits A taxpayer with a tax loss who has outstanding tax written off will forfeit part of that loss. The amount of loss forfeited is calculated by dividing the amount of tax written off by 33% or 28% if the taxpayer is a company. For the purposes of this calculation, a taxpayer’s tax loss is the loss recorded in the most recent return of income filed by the taxpayer. Example 1: Syd returns a tax loss of $9,000 in his 2014–15 tax return. Syd has outstanding tax for the 2013–14 tax year of $5,000. The Commissioner agrees to write off $1,000 of Syd’s outstanding tax in the 2015–16 tax year. Syd’s tax loss carried forward to the 2015–16 tax year is therefore reduced by $3,030.30 ($1,000 ÷ 33%) to $5,969.70 ($9,000 − $3,030.30).  Example 2: The facts are as above, except in this case the Commissioner agrees to write off $3,500 of Syd’s outstanding tax. Syd’s tax loss carried forward to the 2015–16 tax year is reduced to nil. This is because the adjustment amount ($3,500 ÷ 33% = $10,606.06) exceeds Syd’s tax loss of $9,000.  The Commissioner is required to extinguish all or part of excess imputation credits carried forward (see ¶2-110) on a one-for-one basis. If the taxpayer has both a tax loss carried forward and a credit of tax carried forward from excess imputation credits, the Commissioner must extinguish the tax loss carried forward first. See s 177C of the TAA. Standard practice statements In August 2018, Inland Revenue released standard practice statement, SPS 18/04, “Options for relief from tax debt” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 9, October 2018 at 37). SPS 18/04 summarises the Commissioner’s practice when considering options for removing or deferring the obligation to pay tax, interest and/or penalties. With effect from 21 November 2019, SPS 19/05, “Options for relief from child support debt” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 73), sets out the Commissioner’s practice for providing relief when the immediate payment of an overdue child support or domestic maintenance obligation is not possible. Relief is provided in the form of an agreement to pay the debt in instalments, writing off penalties in certain situations or, in limited circumstances, writing off part or all of the child support debt. With effect from 10 November 2020, SPS 20/05, “Student loan repayment — options for relief” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 11, December 2020 at 10), sets out the Commissioner’s practice for providing relief in relation to student loans. It covers relief from payments for:  ▪ overdue student loan repayment obligations ▪ student loan repayment obligations not yet due and for the current tax year, and ▪ penalty and late payment interest imposed on overdue student loan repayment obligations. When providing relief, the Commissioner may: ▪ refrain from issuing a notice of assessment and may write off a student loan repayment obligation not more than $20 ▪ refrain from the collection of any student loan repayment obligation payable that is more than $20 but less than $334 (excluding late payment interest) ▪ reduce any amount that must be paid by a borrower for the current, or next, tax year ▪ reduce a repayment obligation for a previous tax year (the amount not collected is capitalised and will remain on their loan) ▪ agree to an instalment arrangement to repay an unpaid amount ▪ refund any amount paid for the previous or current tax year, and ▪ cancel some or all the late payment interest if it would be equitable to do so. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 176–177CA  ¶2-123 Early-payment discount of income tax To reduce small business tax compliance costs, “small-business persons” (see below) are entitled to an early-payment discount of income tax. The purpose of the discount is to encourage the payment of income tax in the income year before the income year in which the small-business person is required to pay provisional tax.  This avoids the requirement to pay both terminal tax and provisional tax in the second year of business, which, in some cases, may lead to serious cash flow problems and financial difficulties. Small-business person A “small-business person” is defined as a taxpayer who satisfies all of the following criteria: ▪ the business is conducted on the person’s own account — the taxpayer is acting alone or as a partner in a partnership ▪ a company or a trust is not used to conduct the business, and ▪ the income derived is predominantly from the business and not from interest, dividends, royalties, rents or beneficiary income. Broadly, the early-payment discount will apply only to self-employed people and individuals who receive income from partnerships. When the early-payment discount applies A small-business person is entitled to the early-payment discount if all of the following conditions are met: ▪ the small-business person is not required to pay provisional tax in the income year ▪ income tax payments are made for the income year on or before the small-business person’s balance date for the income year ▪ for the period from the small-business person’s balance date for the income year to the taxpayer’s terminal tax date for the income year, a credit of tax is held in an account with the Commissioner of Inland Revenue of at least: □ the amount of tax paid for the income year before the person’s balance date, or □ the amount of terminal tax payable for the income year before the application of the early-payment discount  whichever is the lesser, and ▪ for earlier income years, the small-business person has never been required to pay provisional tax and: □ has never received an early-payment discount, or □ has not derived assessable income from a business in the four income years beginning after the latest income year for which the early-payment discount has been received, or □ has not derived assessable income from a business in the four income years beginning after the latest income year for which the taxpayer was required to pay provisional tax. In effect, the early-payment discount must be claimed before the small-business person is required to pay provisional tax. A smallbusiness person who is required to pay provisional tax before receiving self-employed or partnership income is not entitled to the early-payment discount. Application for discount To claim the early-payment discount, a small-business person must file a tax return for the income year that the discount is claimed and also apply for the early-payment discount on or before the due date for filing the tax return for the income year that the discount is claimed. Amount of discount The early-payment discount is calculated on: ▪ the amount of income tax paid for the income year on or before balance date, or ▪ 105% of the small-business taxpayer’s residual income tax for the income year whichever is the lesser.  The discount rate may be prescribed by Order in Council or, in the absence of such an Order, the rate is 6.7%. The discount is given by way of credit to the small business person’s income tax account. Credit for discount treated as payment of income tax A credit for an early-payment discount is treated as a payment of income tax. The payment is treated as being made on the day after the last day of the income year for which the discount is claimed. Example: Maddie has been a full-time mother for the last five years. During that time, she has neither derived any income from a business nor has she been required to pay provisional tax. Maddie started up a new business on 1 July 2018. On the advice of a friend who is a chartered accountant, Maddie makes voluntary income tax payments for the 2018–19 income year amounting to $9,000. The payments are all made before 31 March 2019 (Maddie’s balance date). Maddie’s first year of business is better than she expected. Her residual income tax for the 2018–19 income year is calculated to be $15,000. Maddie files her 2018–19 tax return on 30 June 2019 and also applies for the early-payment discount. Assuming no discount rate has been prescribed by Order in Council, the amount of Maddie’s early-payment discount is $603 (ie 6.7% of $9,000). This amount is credited to Maddie’s 2018–19 income tax account and is treated as an income tax payment made by Maddie on 1 April 2019.  Law: IT07 ss RC 37–RC 40  ¶2-125 Time for payment of terminal tax The due dates for payment of terminal tax are set out in ¶22-012. Persons who have paid provisional tax for any year are required to furnish returns and make an assessment of their taxable income and tax liability for the year. Provisional tax paid by a person for any year is then credited against the person’s income tax liability for the year, any unpaid tax for any previous year and any unpaid (and due) income or provisional tax for any later year. Any excess after crediting the provisional tax is refunded to the person. If the provisional tax is less than the income tax assessed for the year, the  person is required to pay the amount of any difference to the Commissioner. This is called a terminal tax payment. Persons with a standard balance date (ie those who have a balance date of 31 March) will generally have a due date for terminal tax of 7 February. However, if they are linked to a tax agent, the terminal tax date is 7 April. Terminal tax payment dates for persons with nonstandard balance dates, and provisional taxpayers, fall on the 7th day of the month as specified in sch 3 to the Act. See ¶22-012. However, if the month is January, the due date will be the 15th. Law: IT07 ss LB 2, RA 3, RA 13, RB 1  ¶2-145 Refund of excess tax The Commissioner is required to refund tax if it represents an excess over the tax properly payable, the amount has arisen on an original assessment and she is satisfied of the entitlement to the refund. In the case of an amount that has arisen on an amended assessment, the Commissioner is only required to refund tax (which includes refundable tax credits) if she is satisfied of the entitlement to the refund before the end of the relevant four-year time bar in s 108 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) (see ¶4-110), any extended period for applying for a tax credit allowed under s 78B of that Act, or the seven-year period for amendment of assessments under s GC 13(6) (Calculation of arm’s length amounts). Similarly, the Commissioner must refund tax paid by a person as a result of an amendment to an assessment that increased the amount of tax payable if the Commissioner is satisfied that the amount represents an excess over the tax properly payable and the relevant four-year time bar period has not ended. A taxpayer may claim a refund from an amended assessment outside the time bar period where the refund arises due to a reimbursement ACC attendant care payment. All tax refunds are made by direct credit into a person’s bank account (or an account nominated by the person). The only exception is if the Commissioner is satisfied that paying by direct  credit would result in undue hardship to a person, or is not practicable. Offset against outstanding tax liabilities After applying the provisions in the Income Tax Act 2007 that limit the amount of refund, a refund payable to a person under ss RM 2 and RM 4, including a refundable tax credit under s LA 5(5), may be applied by the Commissioner in payment of an outstanding taxable amount payable under either the Income Tax Act or any other Inland Revenue Act. The refund may be applied in accordance with a tax transfer request made under the tax transfer rules (see ¶2-148) or, if no request has been made, in such order or manner as the Commissioner may determine. However, a refund relating to overpaid RWT or NRWT or WFF tax credits or arising from an election to carry back a loss may not be applied towards an outstanding tax liability. Law: IT07 ss LA 5(5), RB 4, RM 2, RM 4, RM 10; TAA s 184A  ¶2-148 Tax transfers Taxpayers or their agents can request transfers of overpaid tax to other tax periods or to other tax types or to other taxpayers (see below for tax types covered). A key issue in relation to transfers of excess tax is the effective date of transfer because the effective date is relevant to the calculation of tax (including provisional tax) payable and has an impact upon the liability for use of money interest on underpayments of tax. The tax transfer rules set out the effective date of a transfer of excess tax and remove the confusion that previously surrounded the issue. Tax transferred under the tax transfer provisions is treated as a refund to the transferor and a payment by the transferee on the date of transfer, except for the purpose of imposing a shortfall penalty. For the purposes of the tax transfer provisions, “tax” includes child support, student loan repayments, and the charitable donations tax credit. For the rules regarding the transfer of excess child support, see ¶12-038.  Generally, overpaid tax may be transferred within a person’s account and to any other person. Transfers of excess tax within the taxpayer’s accounts or to another taxpayer are limited to the total of the amount in debt and/or in dispute in the requested period. This limit only applies to transfers to earlier periods, not to future periods. A similar limit applies under s 173S in relation to transfers of interest. Note also that the effective transfer date of GST refunds (ie when GST inputs exceed GST outputs) is different from that of GST overpayments (ie when a taxpayer overpays their GST liability). Transfer of tax to another period or tax type Where tax is transferred to another period or tax type of the same taxpayer, the effective date of the transfer can be chosen by the taxpayer and will be: ▪ in the case of a GST refund (under s 19C(8) or 20(5) of the GST Act), the applicable date set out below ▪ in the case of tax withheld or deducted on the taxpayer’s behalf, a day after the end of the accounting year in which the amount was withheld or deducted (except for early balance date taxpayers, who must choose a day after the end of the tax year in which the amount was withheld or deducted, and except for taxpayers who have filed a tax return for the tax year in which the excess tax arises before the end of that tax year, who must choose the day on or after the date the return is filed) ▪ in the case of a tax credit for expenditure on research or development, a day after the end of the accounting year to which the credit relates (except for early balance date taxpayers, who must choose a day after the end of the tax year corresponding to the accounting year to which the credit relates), and ▪ in any other case, a date that occurs on or after the date the excess tax is paid.  The effective date for GST transfers is: ▪ for those taxpayers who file their return before the due date, the earlier of: □ the day on which the return is filed, or □ the day after the end of the GST return period in which the refund relates. ▪ for taxpayers who file their return on the due date, the day after the end of the GST period in which the refund arose, and ▪ for taxpayers who file after the due date, the day the return is filed. Transfer of tax from one taxpayer to another Tax may be