 gains are generally not treated as income (although certain provisions in the Act operate to override this proposition). Furthermore, windfall gains (gifts, bets, etc) are excluded from the concept of income because of their lack of connection to any income-producing property or activity of the recipient. Capital gains are also excluded, subject to the operation of certain deeming provisions mentioned above. Judicial definition It should be noted that the judicial definition of income does not necessarily correspond with an economist’s definition. One of the classic statements on the capital-income distinction was stated in Eisner v Macomber 252 US 189 (1919) where income was seen as the fruit or produce (eg dividends, rents, royalties) derived from an enduring source such as land or other property (or a person’s ability to earn income from personal exertion). By contrast, an economist would favour a definition of income based on accretions to net wealth of an individual by taking the amount spent by a person during the particular taxation period and adding increases or subtracting decreases in net worth. The most important divergence in analysing the statutory/judicial interpretation of income and the economic definition of income is the capital–income distinction drawn by the former and relatively ignored by the latter. Generally, capital gains are still excluded from the scope of income tax, placing significant pressure on the capital– income border. The decisions in a vast number of cases on this subject have only determined that at best the capital–income distinction is an elusive concept. The courts have, however, identified several criteria that have been taken as the hallmark of receipts of an income nature. In Reid v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,624, the High Court accepted that these were as follows: ▪ income is something that comes in  ▪ income imports the notion of periodicity, recurrence and regularity, and ▪ whether a particular receipt is income depends upon its quality in the hands of the recipient.  ¶5-021 Characteristics of income Although it is not always easy to determine whether a receipt is “income” in its ordinary sense, case law has, over the years, set down some basic principles. These may be summarised as follows. Income is something that comes in Income is something that comes in. See Tennant v Smith [1892] AC 150, Lambe v IR Commrs (1933) 18 TC 212; [1933] All ER Rep 417 per Finlay J. Even if a benefit saves a person from incurring expenditure, the saving is not income: income is what comes in, not what is saved from going out. See FC of T v Cooke and Sherden 80 ATC 4140. Linked to this is the proposition that income is something which is money or money’s worth. In other words, save for explicit provision to the contrary (eg s CC 7 Consideration other than in money), unless a benefit can be converted into money or money’s worth, it is not something that has come in and, therefore, it is not taxable as income. Having said this, some parts of the Act treat certain economic benefits as income. One example may be found in ss EW 29–EW 31, which deal with the calculation and allocation of income when a financial arrangement ceases. Periodicity, recurrence, regularity Income generally has the features of periodicity, recurrence and regularity. See FC of T v Dixon (1952) 10 ATD 82; 86 CLR 540. See also FC of T v The Myer Emporium Ltd 87 ATC 4363; (1987) 163 CLR 199.  Example 1: Payments of a student teacher allowance to a trainee teacher were held to be income under ordinary concepts under s 65(2)(l) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s CA 1(2) of the Income Tax Act 2007). The allowance received was a regular periodical payment made to the taxpayer to defray his expenses while attending teacher’s college. The allowance was a contractual payment to which the taxpayer was entitled, so long as he performed his side of the bargain. See Reid v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,176 (CA).  However, in Jones v Leeming [1930] AC 415, the House of Lords accepted that profits need not be recurrent within the income year or be capable of recurrence from year to year to be taxable. Further, receipts of a regular nature are not always of an income character. Example 2: A retired bank employee received four ex gratia payments from his former employer to supplement his pension. It was decided that the first of those payments was not in the nature of an income receipt. It was simply a gift. See FC of T v Harris 80 ATC 4238. (Note that in New Zealand, s CF 1 provides that such payments are income.)  In FC of T v Anstis 2010 ATC ¶20-221 the High Court of Australia, at [13]–[24], commented on the periodicity, regularity and reliance by a taxpayer on the amount to meet living expenses. The court stated that the periodicity of receipts is not necessarily sufficient to give those receipts the character of income. The periodical nature of a receipt enables the recipient to rely on such amounts to meet regular expenditure. However, on its own it is not sufficient to label the receipts as income. There must be regard had to the totality of circumstances. Quality in the hands of the recipient The character of a receipt may depend on its quality in the hands of the recipient. For example, a gift to a solicitor from a client may not be an income receipt if made for personal reasons. See Scott v FC of T (1966) 117 CLR 514. However, when such contributions are relied upon by the recipient as a means of support, they may  constitute the proceeds from the carrying on of a business. See G v C of IR [1961] NZLR 994. Convertibility into cash Generally, for a receipt to be income, it must be convertible into money or money’s worth. This is often an important consideration when determining the tax treatment of a prize received. A prize will generally be included in a person’s assessable income if it is convertible into money or money’s worth, and relates in some way to services rendered or derived from carrying on a business (as opposed to a windfall gain). See Dawson v C of IR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,252, FC of T v Cooke and Sherden 80 ATC 4140. See also Payne v FC of T 96 ATC 4407, where the Federal Court of Australia held that the market value of airline tickets obtained under a frequent flyer scheme was not money and could not be turned to “pecuniary account”, ie converted to cash. In Moore v Griffiths [1972] 3 All ER 399, it was held that cash prizes won by a professional football player were not taxable, because they had the quality of a testimonial or accolade rather than a remuneration for services rendered. Compare this to Kelly v FC of T 85 ATC 4283 where a cash prize that was won by a professional footballer for being voted the season’s best and fairest player was held to be taxable. Prizes awarded in kind and not convertible into cash are generally tax free to the recipient. In contrast, prizes that can readily be exchanged for cash are likely to constitute assessable income.  ¶5-026 Non-income receipts There are several categories of receipt that are recognised as being of a non-income nature. These are capital receipts (see ¶5-031), gifts and legacies, lottery or gambling winnings, reimbursements of private expenses and proceeds from mutual transactions. Generally, any receipt coming within one of these categories would not be included within the recipient’s assessable income. If betting is indulged in as a means of producing an income as opposed to gambling as a sport or pastime, winnings can be included in assessable income. See ¶5-167.  Capital gains are not generally liable to income tax. For example, a gain from the sale of an investment asset where the taxpayer is not in the business of dealing in that type of asset and the asset was not acquired for the purpose of resale. See further at ¶5-031. Example: A taxpayer company exercised an option conferred by the company’s late governing director to acquire some property. Immediately thereafter, the company sold the property for a substantial profit. The court held that a profit or gain realised from the bounty of a testator does not produce a profit or gain of an income nature. See AG Healing & Co Ltd v C of IR [1964] NZLR 222.  ¶5-031 Capital receipts The most significant class of non-income receipts are those of a capital nature. Accordingly, accretions to capital or capital receipts are not normally brought into the tax net, unless specific provision is made under the Act. The concept of capital is not defined in the Act and so, like the term “income”, it is defined in line with its natural and ordinary meaning. Ultimately, the distinction between capital and income is a matter of common sense in the particular circumstances. Over the years, a number of tests have been developed by the courts to assist in distinguishing between income and capital receipts, but no infallible criterion has emerged from the cases. As mentioned at ¶5-010, one of the classic statements on the income–capital distinction is found in Eisner v Macomber 252 US 189 (1919). In that case, income was seen as the fruit or produce (eg dividends, rents or royalties) derived from an enduring source such as land or other property (or a taxpayer’s ability to earn income from personal exertion). Thus, it would follow that the profitable sale of an asset, “the tree”, without more, would produce not income but a gain of a capital nature. That proposition has been applied by the courts, so that the proceeds of a mere realisation of a capital asset or a change of investment are not regarded as producing income gains. By contrast, assets ventured in a successful profit-making  scheme will generally realise gains of an income nature. See Californian Copper Syndicate (Limited and Reduced) v Harris (1904) 5 TC 159. The courts have been prepared to make a distinction between fixed and circulating capital. The distinction between the two was described by Lord Pearce in BP Australia Ltd v C of T of the Commonwealth of Australia [1966] AC 224 (PC) at 265–266: Fixed capital is prima facie that on which you look to get a return by your trading operation. Circulating capital is that which comes back in your trading operations. This concept was approved by the New Zealand Court of Appeal in C of IR v Inglis (1992) 14 NZTC 9,180 (CA) in determining that property bought with the purpose of disposal takes on the nature of circulating capital by virtue of s CB 4. See ¶5-197, ¶5-217 and ¶10075. A sum that is received annually or periodically is often treated as income rather than capital, but this factor is not a decisive test. See ¶5-021. Likewise, the receipt of a lump sum does not necessarily mean that the receipt is of a capital nature, although it goes some way in asserting that a receipt is of a capital nature. Example 1: Payments by petrol wholesalers to improve retailers’ premises in return for a trade tie were held to be capital in the hands of the retailer. See C of IR v City Motor Service Ltd, C of IR v Napier Motors Ltd [1969] NZLR 1,010. However, one-off inducement payments made to service station proprietors to sell Mobil products exclusively were held to be revenue on the basis that the taxpayers did not give up any part of their business or change the structural nature of their business in exchange for the inducement payment. See Birkdale Service Station Ltd v C of IR (2000) 19 NZTC 15,981 (CA). For further discussion on trade tie arrangements, see ¶5-419.  See also, Nethersole v Withers (1948) 28 TC 501, Marac Life Assurance Ltd v C of IR, C of IR v Marac Life Assurance Ltd (1986) 8 NZTC 5,086, Goldfinch and Coley v C of IR (1988) 10 NZTC 5,246, Union Steamship Co of New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17  NZTC 12,629 (CA) and C of IR v Wattie (1998) 18 NZTC 13,991 (PC). Land transactions In contrast, specific provision is made in ss CB 6A–CB 14 to tax capital receipts arising from certain land transactions. See ¶7-010. Example 2: On general principles, the profits arising from a land subdivision scheme were of a capital nature. However, the wording, context and background of s 67 of the 1976 Act (found in ss CB 6A–CB 14 of the Income Tax Act 2007) showed that profits falling within its specific and detailed language were taxable irrespective of whether they were otherwise to be classified as capital profits. See Lowe v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,006.  See ¶10-075 for a discussion on the capital v revenue distinction in the context of expenditure.  DERIVATION OF INCOME ¶5-040 Derivation of income: general concepts Income is something that comes in. There are several authorities that confirm the view that income is not derived until something has been received, ie that an amount derived during the income year, and upon which income tax is payable, is the total of actual receipts that year. As an exception to this rule, business persons are taxed on an earnings basis and they must include within their assessable income the trade debts owed to them that arise during the income year, even though the moneys payable under the debt may not be received by the end of the income year. Which rule applies in any one case depends on the nature of the business carried on by the person and the type of receipt in  question. Another exception to the receipts principle is provided in s BD 3(4), see ¶5-043.  ¶5-043 Income derived but not received Under s BD 3(4), an amount is treated as being derived even though it may not have been actually paid to or received by a person or has yet to become due or receivable. This principle applies when the amount has been dealt with in the person’s interest or on the person’s behalf, such as by crediting it to an account. Example 1: A taxpayer deposited some money with a finance company. The money was subsequently lost when the finance company went into liquidation. The taxpayer sought to deduct from his income some of the tax that he had paid on interest in previous years that he had allowed to be compounded and reinvested in the liquidated finance company. This deduction was disallowed. The Taxation Review Authority held that the interest reinvested for him was still income to him and was derived on the date on which it was credited to his account. The authority stated that once interest was credited or added to other funds, reinvested, accumulated or capitalised, the taxpayer was deemed to have derived that interest as income, even though it had not physically been handed over to him. See Case N40 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,344.  See also Case M42 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,261 and C of IR v The Farmers’ Trading Company Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,007 (CA). Law: IT07 s BD 3(4)  ¶5-051 Employment income — remuneration derived by an employee Employment income is derived by an employee, other than a shareholder-employee (¶5-053), only when received. This means when it is paid to the employee or, when it has been credited to an account or dealt with in the employee’s interest or on the employee’s behalf. An employee is a person who receives or is entitled to receive a PAYE income payment. A PAYE income payment is defined in s RD 3 as:  ▪ a payment by way of salary, wages or an extra pay, or ▪ a schedular payment. A PAYE income payment does not include an amount attributed under the attribution rule for personal services (see ¶33-325). The PAYE rules apply to these payments, and the relevant amounts that are withheld are treated as received and derived by the employee at the same time and in the same way as the PAYE income payment. See s RA 9. A person’s “employment income” is an amount derived in connection with the person’s employment or service, being an amount of the following type: ▪ salary or wages or an allowance, bonus, extra pay or gratuity ▪ expenditure on account of an employee that is expenditure on account of the person ▪ the value of certain accommodation ▪ a benefit received under an employee share scheme ▪ directors’ fees ▪ compensation for loss of employment or service, and ▪ any other benefit in money. By implication, “employment income” also includes holiday pay, longservice pay, retiring or sick leave accruals and bonuses, because these types of payments are derived in connection with the person’s employment. The term “employment” is defined in s YA 1. The definition includes the activities performed by the Governor-General, a member of Parliament or a judicial officer that give rise to an entitlement to receive a PAYE income payment in respect of those activities.  Employment income does not include a superannuation cash contribution made by an employer to a superannuation scheme for the benefit of employees (unless an employee chooses to treat it as salary or wages). These contributions are subject to fringe benefit tax or employer’s superannuation contribution tax. With effect from 1 April 2019, an amount of unrepaid PAYE income overpayment is also treated as employment income: see ¶5-290. Law: IT07 ss BD 3(4), CE 1, RA 9, RD 3, YA 1  ¶5-053 Employment income — remuneration derived by a shareholder-employee A shareholder-employee of a company is deemed to derive employment income in the same income year as the company is allowed a deduction for payment of that employment income. A company is allowed a deduction of the employment income if it is paid or payable to the shareholder-employee by the 31 March that is the last date for filing the company’s return of income. The exception is when the expenditure is classified as the unexpired portion of the company’s expenditure on employment income under s EA 4. In that case, the shareholder-employee derives the remaining income in the income year in which that expenditure is no longer unexpired. Sections RD 3, RD 3B and RD 3C set out the circumstances when amounts can be paid to shareholder-employees of certain closelyheld companies without deduction of PAYE. Those shareholderemployees who receive both regular salary or wages throughout the year and variable amounts of other employment income are able to elect to split their income so that the base salary is subject to PAYE and the variable amount is paid out before tax. See further at ¶3012. The definition of “employment income” in s YA 1 ensures that the income of a shareholder-employee who has elected that employment income is not subject to the PAYE rules remains treated as employment income for the purpose of non-PAYE provisions. Law: IT07 ss EI 9, RD 3, RD 3B, RD 3C, YA 1  ¶5-055 Taxation of inflation-indexed bonds Sections EI 2 and CX 53 govern the taxation of the inflation-linked component of financial instruments in respect of money lent. The inflation-linked component of financial instruments is treated as having been credited in account and capitalised by the borrower for the benefit of the lender on the day after the day on which the level of the relevant indicator index becomes public knowledge. The policy intent is to tax holders of this type of instrument who are cash-basis persons on an annual basis instead of on a payments basis in respect of the inflation-linked amounts. Non-cash-basis persons are taxable under the financial arrangements rules (see ¶6-010). The deemed crediting in account of the inflation amount means the sum has been paid for resident withholding tax purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 9, February 1996 at 12. An amount credited to the lender of an inflation-indexed bond that is a recovery of a decrease in the amount payable over a previous period, that amount having been previously debited in account, is excluded income of the lender. Therefore, the credit paid in this case is not income derived by the lender. Law: IT07 ss CX 53, EI 2  ¶5-057 When dividend income is derived Generally, a dividend is treated as having been derived when it is paid or credited to the shareholder or otherwise freed from the company’s control. A dividend is not to be treated as income merely because it has been declared. The test may be satisfied when the dividend is credited to the shareholder’s account, offset against the shareholder’s indebtedness to the company or otherwise applied for the shareholder’s benefit, eg paid over to some other person at the shareholder’s direction. The Commissioner generally does not recognise the backdating of any dividend. For example, a dividend declared on 8 August 2019 and expressed to be payable for the previous year ended 31 March  2019 must be returned as part of the income received during the year in which it is paid, that is the 2019–20 tax year. The Commissioner will also not recognise backdating of any excessive remuneration paid by a close company that is deemed to be a dividend. On such an occasion, the amount treated as a dividend remains income in the year in which it was received as salary. It is not treated as a dividend in the year in which the Commissioner forms the opinion that the remuneration is excessive.  ¶5-059 Income from personal services Generally, a person’s income resulting from his or her own personal exertions is derived at the point that it is earned. The tax on that income is paid at that time. These principles of law were confirmed in Case T4 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,021 where a married couple contended they were in partnership in the business of providing for their family and should be able to treat their individual incomes as the joint income of the partnership. The Taxation Review Authority (the Authority) upheld the Commissioner’s view that the couple was unable to divide the income between themselves for tax purposes. The law regarded the husband’s income as resulting from his own personal exertions and it was therefore derived by him at the point that it was earned. What the husband chose to do with that income was entirely his own affair, but the tax on that income was paid at the point and at the time of derivation. A taxpayer deriving personal services income whilst carrying on a business is subject to the general principles relating to the recognition of business income. Those principles recognise that, in a few instances, personal services income from a business may be recognised on a cash basis. Case D14 (1979) 4 NZTC 60,507 concerned the salary of a staff accountant. The Authority held that the salary was assessable in the income year received, notwithstanding that part of it was attributable to services performed in another income year. The Authority was clear that the salary fell for assessment in the income year received.  In Brent v FC of T 71 ATC 4195 the taxpayer, the wife of the great train robber Ronald Biggs, sold her story to a newspaper for $65,250. In the 1970 income year, she only received $10,000. The High Court of Australia confirmed that only the $10,000 and not the whole sum of $65,250 was assessable in that income year. In Bowcock v C of IR (1981) 5 NZTC 61,062 a taxpayer obtained two years’ study leave. He undertook to repay any salary received while on leave should he leave his employer within a stipulated time. The taxpayer did leave and claimed that the amounts that had to be repaid had never been part of his income because they had been subject to this claim of repayment. The court held that the moneys had been the absolute property of the taxpayer when paid and were allowances or emoluments relating to the taxpayer’s employment or service and were therefore assessable income. These general principles of derivation of personal services income are altered in some instances: ▪ s EI 9 contains a matching rule by which the unexpired portion of a shareholder-employee’s income is deferred to the following income year ▪ ss GB 27–GB 29 contain an attribution rule for income from personal services. Law: IT07 ss CE 1, YD 4(4)  ¶5-061 Taxation of life insurance agent’s commission Generally, a life insurance agent receives commission income in instalments, partly upon sale of a new policy and partly at some later date. If the policy is cancelled shortly after its commencement, the agent may have to return some commission income. See ¶3-201. Commission payments are assessable income in the tax year in which they are received. Any repayment of commission upon a policy cancellation may be deducted from the commission income received in the year of repayment. Advances made in the  expectation of commissions being earned are taxable when the commission is actually earned and applied against advances previously made. The advances, therefore, are not necessarily assessable income in the year of receipt. Example: The taxpayer received a commission calculated and paid by instalments for each policy he sold. The company for which the taxpayer worked could make advances to the agent, on account of the commission, that were repayable as a debt due to the company in the event that the policy did not remain in force for a two-year period. If the policy lapsed within seven months the total amount advanced was repayable, but otherwise it was repayable on a proportional basis relating to the number of complete months during which the policy remained in force. The taxpayer returned as assessable income commissions paid to him by the company exclusive of prepaid commissions. The Commissioner assessed the prepaid commissions as assessable income at the time of receipt. The court held that the advances made to the agent on account of the commission did not have the quality of income derived by the agent at the time of receipt and were properly to be regarded as a loan. See C of IR v Molloy (1990) 12 NZTC 7,146 (HC).  Commissions on life insurance sold to agent’s family It is the Commissioner’s view that cash commissions received by a life agent on the life agent’s own life policy or a family life policy are assessable income of the life agent. Similarly, if a life agent sets off commissions on such policies against premiums payable on these policies, the amount of commission set off is assessable income of the life agent. In contrast, when a life agent receives a discounted premium on his or her own policy or members of his or her family receive discounted premiums on family policies, the amount of the discount is not assessable income of the life agent. See public binding ruling BR Pub 10/07, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 5, June 2010 at 8. This ruling applies for an indefinite period beginning on the first day of the 2008–09 income year. For the fringe benefit tax implications of discounted policies, see public binding ruling BR Pub 10/08, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 5, June 2010 at 8, and ¶21-535.  ¶5-065 Income by cheque  The handing over of a cheque may be regarded as payment for an underlying debt. At this point, the recipient has derived the income, with the income represented by the cheque arising in the year in which it is handed over. There is a line of English decisions that support a contrary view in that the income represented by the cheque must be at the disposal of the taxpayer before it can be said to have been derived. Receipt of the cheque is not enough, because it is not certain that the cheque will be honoured. See Parkside Leasing Ltd v Smith [1985] BTC 25. However, the New Zealand courts consider that, in the income tax context, the payment is made at the time a cheque is handed over or received, rather than when it is presented at the bank and honoured. The taxpayer in Ullrich v C of IR [1964] NZLR 386 leased out a building to his son. In 1957 he received from his son a cheque for £520 representing at least two years’ rent in advance. The cheque was not banked but the Commissioner still included the £520 in the taxpayer’s assessable income for the year ended 31 March 1957. The High Court confirmed the Commissioner’s assessment. The decision in Ullrich was applied in Case N36 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,312. A cheque that is subsequently dishonoured is treated as if payment were never made. See Nicks Ltd v Taylors Ltd [1962] NZLR 286. The Commissioner had adopted a similar approach to the New Zealand courts in the goods and services tax context. See public binding ruling BR Pub 96/12 “GST: time of supply when payment is made by cheque, credit card, charge card or irrevocable letter of credit”, which set out the Commissioner’s views on the time of supply for goods and services tax purposes when payment was made by cheque, credit card, charge card or irrevocable letter of credit. The ruling expired on 31 December 1999. A draft public binding ruling, PU0089, was issued for comment in October 2001, which reconsidered the above position in relation to payments by cheque. It was intended that this draft replace BR Pub 96/12 but it was never finalised.  RECOGNITION OF INCOME  ¶5-075 Recognition of income — tax accounting Tax accounting is concerned with the time at which income is derived and expenditure incurred. In relation to items of assessable income, the general rule is that unless the item is derived by a person, it is not required to be recognised as income by that person. Taxable income cannot be calculated before items of income derived and expenditure incurred are ascertained. As a practical matter, the timing of the recognition of income or deductions is critical to determining the impact of tax liabilities. If the recognition of income can be deferred or the taking of a deduction brought forward, significant advantages to a taxpayer can arise. A number of statutory provisions seek to achieve the matching of income and expenditure. See, for example, s EA 1 and ¶10-052. See also ¶1-050 for the overall effect of the core provisions. In relation to the recognition of income, the major issues under the Act are whether income ought to be recognised on a cash or an accrual basis, and whether income recognition can be deferred on the basis that although income may have been received it has not been earned in the period of receipt. Law: IT07 ss BD 3, EA 1  ¶5-077 Cash method of tax accounting The cash method operates exclusively on the basis of income actually received during the tax year, ie income that is derived when it is received. The Commissioner accepts use of the method in relation to wage and salary earners, doctors and barristers. The cash system may operate unfairly in the case of some persons. When income receipts are spasmodic rather than continuous, and when the year in which expenses relating to the earning of that income does not coincide with the year in which the income is received, a person may find it necessary to pay tax at a relatively higher rate in one year and in another year have little or no income from which to  deduct expenses. In some countries, averaging provisions have been enacted to deal with this problem. However, a cash basis for income is open to abuse through persons adopting the simple expedient of delaying the receipt of cash. Section BD 3(4) is intended to prevent this abuse by providing that a person is treated as having derived income if the amount in question is credited in account, or, in some other way, dealt with in the interest or on behalf of the person. In addition, because a person who is on a cash basis is not required to place a value on work in progress, a delay in completion of the work allows deferral of derivation of the income until a subsequent tax year. Law: IT07 s BD 3(4)  ¶5-078 Accrual or earnings method of tax accounting The accrual or earnings method treats as income amounts that have been earned though not necessarily received, ie income is derived when it becomes due, even though it has not been received by the person. The method requires that the income and the expenses that arise from the same transaction should be recognised at the same time. Therefore, amounts that have been earned but for which no payment has yet been received are required to be brought into account as a debt. The accrual or earnings basis is a method that recognises the realities of business, in which business income is represented by trading profits, not receipts. This earnings-related concept applies to amounts that have been earned but not received in the period and amounts received but not actually earned in the period. Example 1: Under an earnings approach, amounts received in a particular income year but not earned are not required to be taken into account as income (ie income is not derived unless and until it is earned). See Arthur Murray (NSW) Pty Ltd v C of T (Cth of A) (1965) 114 CLR 314.  However, it must be remembered that under current law the earnings principle applies only to gross revenue and does not impinge on the timing of deductibility, which is subject to its own specific code. If the trading debts brought in as income are subsequently not recovered, they may be written off and a deduction would be allowed as a bad debt. On several occasions, the Court of Appeal has emphasised that the accrual method applies to most persons carrying on a business. Example 2: The decision in C of IR v The Farmers’ Trading Co Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,007 is a strong endorsement of the accrual method of tax accounting for businesses selling consumer goods on credit. Richardson J stated that “business profits are derived when and to the extent that gains are made from trading irrespective of the form those gains take. On sale of trading stock, a debt arises in favour of the vendor. The stock leaves his account and prima facie the debt for which it was exchanged should be brought into account in its place. It is implicit in the legislation that trading debts cannot be ignored in the calculation of business profits and must be brought into account on a paper basis if that is feasible.” However, the Court of Appeal did recognise two exceptions in which the accrual method might not be appropriate. The first exception is when the trader is providing long-term financial accommodation rather than ordinary commercial credit, ie a trader engaged in moneylending, with the implication that credit instalments should be returned on a receipts basis. The second exception is when the nature of the trader’s business may be such that it would be unwise to adopt the accrual method (this would be when it would not be prudent for the trader to follow the accrual method and match costs with revenue in the same period).  See also Hawke’s Bay Power Distribution Ltd v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,226 (CA). In terms of non-business income, it is generally recognised that this income will not be subject to an earnings principle. In the absence of a business, there is no imperative to match income with a particular item of expenditure and income can be accounted for on a cash basis. See ¶5-077. Like the cash method, the accrual method also has its deficiencies. The principal weakness is that it may require a person to return, and pay tax on, sums that have not actually been received. This may have adverse cash flow implications for the person.  Accrual accounting for financial arrangements A code for accrual tax accounting in relation to financial arrangements is set out in subpart EW. These provisions apply largely to taxation of debt instruments and require income and expenditure to be spread over the life of the arrangement. See ¶6010.  ¶5-082 Profit emerging method of tax accounting Another method of tax accounting is the profit emerging method. This method is a combination of the cash and accrual methods. The profit emerging method of tax accounting is employed for time payment transactions when there are amounts owing by way of instalment at the end of the tax year (receivables). Each receivable is assigned a proportion as to its merchandise content, with the balance being the gross profit content. For the receivables on hand at the end of the tax year, only the merchandise content of those receivables is returned as part of assessable income for that year. The gross profit content is returned in a following tax year when the receivables fall due for payment. The Commissioner has accepted the use of the profit emerging method for a department store selling consumer goods by way of hire purchase sale. However, the Court of Appeal in C of IR v The Farmers’ Trading Co Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,007 (CA) held that the method should not be adopted for credit sales where title to the consumer goods passes immediately upon sale. See ¶5-078.  ¶5-087 Appropriate method of accounting The general principle is that a person must adopt the method of tax accounting that best discloses the person’s true income. It is the task of the courts to decide which of several accounting methods would produce the most accurate profit figure for a tax year. It seems that the courts, after the decisions in Fincon (Construction) Ltd v C of IR 69 ATC 6034, C of IR v The National Bank of New Zealand (1976) 2 NZTC 61,150 (CA) and C of IR v The Farmers’ Trading Co Ltd  (1989) 11 NZTC 6,007 (CA), regard the accrual method as generally being the appropriate method of tax accounting for persons carrying on a business. For accounting for long-term construction contracts, see ¶7-385. Commissioner’s statement The general rule is that the accrual or earnings method is the most appropriate method of tax accounting for professionals carrying on a business. An exception to that rule was previously recognised for barristers and doctors, who were expected to compute their professional income on a cash or receipt basis. This position has been modified in the Commissioner’s interpretation statement, IS 16/06, “Income tax — timing — when is income from professional services derived?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 1, February 2017 at 9). The statement replaces a number of earlier PIB and TIB items on this topic, in particular with regard to medical practitioners, barristers sole, directors and professionals who operate through a company. The statement discusses the general principles of when the cash basis and the accrual basis may be used and confirms no general rule of law requires that any particular profession must account for income using one method or the other. However, the correct method is not a matter of choice or practice. Identifying the correct method is a question of fact, having regard to the nature of the business or income-earning activity of any given professional. The appropriate method is the one that provides a substantially correct reflex of income for the particular taxpayer. The statement identifies that the courts consider a variety of factors when determining which method is appropriate for a particular business or profession. Not all factors will be relevant in every case and the factors will likely be given different weights. The courts consider these factors: ▪ the type of activity carried on by the taxpayer that gave rise to the income ▪ the characteristics of the type of income at issue  ▪ the legal and regulatory environment in which the taxpayer operates ▪ the scale of the business or income-earning activity, and ▪ the level of sophistication or complexity of the business. In each case, these factors must be weighed against one another to decide which method is appropriate. The statement also notes that the courts have held that a cash basis may be appropriate in the following circumstances: ▪ an ordinary individual who does not carry on a trade, profession, or business ▪ a business or income-earning activity involving a professional person marketing nothing but their own services and receiving nothing but professional fees ▪ a business in which expenditure contributes to income in a subsidiary or minor degree, and ▪ a business in which the risk of non-collectable trade debts is unusually high. In most other situations where income is earned from professional services, the accrual basis will be appropriate. When a person accounts for income on a cash basis, that person’s income is derived when it is received. When a person accounts for income on an accrual basis, that person’s income is derived when it is earned. The time at which income is earned may be evident from the contract. The cases show that determining when professional fees are earned can be broken down into the following questions: ▪ First, has the taxpayer performed the services required under the contract and discharged their obligations?  ▪ Second, is the taxpayer entitled under the contract to demand payment for the services provided? The statement recognises that if there is no contract or the terms of a contract do not determine when income is derived, then standard accounting principles and commercial practice may assist in determining when income from professional fees is derived. In particular, it will be necessary to determine whether: ▪ the income-earning process is complete ▪ the amount of income can be reasonably calculated, and ▪ what has taken place satisfies the general understanding among practical business people of what constitutes a derivation of income. The statement acknowledges that earlier PIB and TIB items, which implied that professionals, other than medical practitioners and barristers sole, had to account for income on an accrual basis, were incorrect. As there is no general rule for any particular profession, the statement makes clear that it is a question of fact and the factors discussed above must be applied to any given professional. Thus, the statement confirms that in the case of medical practitioners, each individual’s circumstances must be considered. The statement states that having regard to the general nature of a medical practice, a medical practitioner who practices as a sole practitioner on a small scale, with no employees (other than, for example, an administrative assistant or secretary who does not bring in fee income) can account on the cash basis. Other medical practitioners who operate through a larger structure should, in most cases, account for income on an accrual basis. This is because the accrual basis is generally appropriate for most businesses, including professions. With regard to barristers sole, the statement acknowledges that a barrister sole’s practice is usually small in scale and the income is predominantly fees from personal services or legal aid payments. Having regard to the general nature of a barrister sole’s practice, it is expected that the cash basis would generally be appropriate.  However, some barristers may operate a more sophisticated practice on a larger scale and therefore it is conceivable that in some situations the accrual basis may be more appropriate. The same approach applies to directors. The statement also modifies the Commissioner’s previous approach to professionals who operate through a company. The Commissioner considers that there is no general rule of law that prohibits a company run by a professional in sole practice from accounting for its income on a cash basis. This is provided the professional is the only person providing the services and the scale and sophistication of the business otherwise indicates that the cash basis is appropriate. The statement recognises that, where it is necessary to change from one basis to the other, s EG 2 provides rules for the transition. The effect of applying s EG 2 is that all income is accounted for when a person moves from a cash basis to an accrual basis. When a person moves from an accrual basis to a cash basis, s EG 2 also prevents income from being double counted.  ¶5-097 Adjustment for change in accounting basis Under general law, a tax advantage may be obtained by changing from a cash to an accrual (or earnings) accounting method, and a corresponding tax disadvantage suffered on a change from an accrual to a cash method. To overcome these effects, ss CH 4, DB 52 and EG 2 generally provide that, in the income year in which a person changes from a cash accounting method to an accrual accounting method for tax purposes: ▪ an amount owed to the person on the last day of the income year before the year of change is income in the year of change, and ▪ an amount owed by the person on the last day of the income year before the year of change is an allowable deduction in the year of change.  Similarly, if a person changes from an accrual accounting method to a cash accounting method for tax purposes: ▪ the total of all amounts owing to the person in the year of change that have been treated as income in prior years is an allowable deduction in the year of change, and ▪ the total of all amounts owing by the person in the year of change that have been allowed as a deduction in previous income years is income in the year of change. Law: IT07 ss CH 4, DB 52, EG 2  ¶5-110 Adjustments for incorrect apportionment of amounts received for uncompleted transactions at yearend The amount derived from certain transactions need only be returned as and when it comes in. For example, for the sale of sections from a property subdivision to be paid for on an instalment basis, the correct basis of returning any amount received is to treat all instalments as containing the same proportion of capital and income. Some persons only start to return income in past years once all amounts equal to the total capital content in the transaction have been received. The Commissioner may make adjustments to ensure amounts received on account of such transactions are accounted for properly by using the Commissioner’s general power to amend assessments. See ¶4090.  ¶5-115 Authorised income spreading of fines, premiums and payments for goodwill on grant of lease While there is no general averaging provision in the Act, certain sections allow allocation of income between the year in which it was derived and later years. Goodwill, fines and premiums are income when received by an owner of land from any lease affecting the land (in such a case, the goodwill is equivalent to additional rent  calculated over the whole term of the lease but payable at the commencement as a premium) or by any person on the disposition of any real or personal property, but only if it is the business of that person to deal in such property or if the person acquired it with a view to disposing of it. Although the amount received is income derived in the year of receipt, the person may apply to have the income allocated between that year and the five later income years. The income must be spread on an even basis over the years referred to. The notice of request must be given in the tax year following the tax year in which the goodwill, fines and premiums are derived. See s EI 7(3). The Commissioner may cancel the income spread. In such cases, the balance of the income unreturned is allocated to the income year before the year of cancellation. A lessee comes within the term “owner of land” and any sum received by a lessee as goodwill on the grant of a sublease constitutes income. If the lessee sells the lease, any goodwill received is a capital receipt, unless the vendor is a person who is in the business of dealing in that class of property or if the property is acquired with a view to disposing of it. See ¶5-237. Note that with s CC 1B taxing lease inducement payments from 1 April 2013 (see ¶5-242), a lease premium may be taxable under both ss CC 1 and CC 1B. However, Inland Revenue has confirmed that the tax treatment of amounts already subject to s CC 1 does not change. The amount is included in income only once (s BD 3(6)) and the timing rule for lease inducement payments in s EI 4B does not apply to an amount that is income under s CC 1. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 27. Section CC 1 provides that a payment for a permanent easement, not being a periodic payment, is not taxable to the owner of land (the grantor) under s CC 1. This specific exclusion aligns the tax treatment of a permanent easement (or a perpetual right of way) with that for freehold land. Law: IT07 ss CC 1, EI 7  ¶5-122 Spread of income derived on acquisition of land by Crown A person may spread any income derived from the disposition of land to the Crown, whether that land is compulsorily acquired (under the Public Works Act 1981) or otherwise. An application to spread the income must be made to the Commissioner within 12 months of the end of the tax year in which the income is derived. Later applications may be accepted only on a discretionary basis. The Commissioner may also require satisfactory arrangements to be made for payment of tax on that income. If the income is allowed to be spread, it covers the period between the year in which it is derived and any three later income years. The income must be spread evenly over the years referred to. In addition, if income is allocated to two or more income years, the same proportionate amount of any deduction allowed for the cost of the land must also be spread over the same income years. Under s EI 8(4) any allocation made may be subsequently cancelled by the Commissioner. On cancellation, the income and deductions are then allocated to the income year before the year of cancellation, except for income allocated to any earlier income year. Law: IT07 s EI 8  ¶5-125 Spreading of author’s income — copyright Lump sum payments An author of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work may apply to spread income when he or she has been engaged on a particular work for at least 12 months and receives a lump sum payment for the assignment of the copyright or for the grant of an interest in the copyright by licence. The lump sum payment may be apportioned equally between the year in which the lump sum is received and:  ▪ the previous income year, when the taxpayer was engaged in the making of the work for a period of two years or less, or ▪ the previous two income years, when the taxpayer was engaged in the making of the work for more than two years. For the income to be allocated in the appropriate fashion, the taxpayer must make application to the Commissioner. The application must be made no later than six years after the end of the year of payment. On an allocation being made by the Commissioner, a taxpayer is treated as deriving income in accordance with the apportionment. A lump sum payment includes an advance on account of royalties. Other payments Provision is also made for authors who receive consideration for an assignment or grant other than by way of a lump sum payment. In most instances this will refer to a taxpayer who derives periodic royalties, which are taxable under s CC 9. When the royalties or other payment would be income in a tax year and are received within two years after first publication of the work, they may be allocated equally between the year of receipt and the prior year. The wording in s EI 3(3) indicates that such allocation is optional. If an allocation is desired for a non-lump sum payment, the author must make an application to the Commissioner requesting the same. The application must be made within eight years of first publication of the work. A first publication of a work is taken to be the first occasion on which the work or a reproduction of it is published, performed or exhibited. The provisions dealing with non-lump sum payments also apply where it is the author who publishes his or her own work. Law: IT07 ss CC 9, EI 3  SOURCE AND RESIDENCE  ¶5-135 Source of income subject to tax A person who is resident in New Zealand is liable to tax on all income derived at the time the person was resident, whether the income is derived from New Zealand or elsewhere, and whether or not it is remitted to New Zealand. See ¶5-144. A person not resident in New Zealand is liable to New Zealand income tax on income that has a source in New Zealand. A person not resident in New Zealand who does not derive income from New Zealand is not subject to any New Zealand income tax. A person’s liability is subject to some other provisions in the Income Tax Act 2007, eg s BH 1, which allows relief from double taxation on income potentially liable to tax in two or more countries (see ¶5-137), and subpart CW, which sets out which receipts are exempt from income tax.  ¶5-137 Double tax agreements In certain circumstances, the provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007 are overridden by international treaties (or double tax agreements) that New Zealand has entered into with other jurisdictions. Their principal relevance is to non-residents deriving income sourced from New Zealand. Generally, a non-resident deriving New Zealandsourced income would be taxed on that income in the non-resident’s own country of residence. A double taxation agreement in broad terms will regulate and integrate the rights of New Zealand to tax the relevant income on a source basis and the other country to tax on a residency basis. The purpose of such agreements is to avoid double taxation of the same income in the two relevant jurisdictions. The method by which this integration is achieved provides a right to the country of source to tax (often at a reduced rate) and obliges the country of residence to grant a credit for tax paid by its resident in the country of source. See ¶26-280. Example:  A New Zealand resident receives a pension from Germany. While s CF 1 operates to tax that income in New Zealand, Art 18(2) of the Double Taxation Relief (Federal Republic of Germany) Order 1980 provides that such pension is taxable only in Germany. Since the double tax agreement overrides the domestic law of contracting states, the pension received is not taxable in New Zealand.  Law: IT07 s BH 1  ¶5-139 New Zealand defined For tax purposes, “New Zealand” is defined in broad terms. The intent of the extended definition in s YA 1 is to extend the New Zealand income tax jurisdiction to cover the resource exploration and exploitation activities carried out on New Zealand’s continental shelf. For tax purposes, New Zealand comprises the New Zealand land mass and the air space above that land mass. It also comprises the territorial sea of New Zealand (as defined in s 3 of the Territorial Sea, Contiguous Zone, and Exclusive Economic Zone Act 1977; briefly stated, the sea within 12 nautical miles of the coast of New Zealand) including the seabed and subsoil beneath the sea and the air space above the sea, the seabed and subsoil of the continental shelf extending beyond the territorial sea of New Zealand and the water and the air space above that part of the continental shelf beyond the territorial sea (to the extent that there is some exploration or exploitation of that part of the continental shelf or its natural resources). This last limb of the definition is intended to extend New Zealand’s tax jurisdiction to that part of the continental shelf beyond the territorial sea where exploitation activities such as petroleum prospecting are carried out in the sea or in the air space above the seabed. The definition does not extend New Zealand’s tax jurisdiction to activities carried on away from that air space or seabed, even though they may ultimately be concerned with exploitation of that air space or seabed. Example:  A seismic survey carried out above the continental shelf would be within New Zealand’s tax jurisdiction. By contrast, the drawing up of the plans for that survey in another country would not be within New Zealand’s tax jurisdiction.  Law: IT07 s YA 1  ¶5-142 Significance of residence The general rule is that residents of New Zealand are taxed on all income irrespective of the country from which it was derived, whereas non-residents are taxed only on their income derived from New Zealand sources. Formerly, it was possible for a New Zealand resident to avoid New Zealand tax on foreign-sourced income by arranging for that income to be derived by a company or a trust established in a foreign jurisdiction. If the trust or company was not resident in New Zealand and did not distribute its income, the income was not subject to New Zealand income tax. Regimes introduced to counter this erosion include: the controlled foreign company (CFC) regime, the foreign investment fund (FIF) regime, the settlor regime for foreign trusts, the transfer pricing regime and the thin capitalisation rules. The purpose of both the CFC and the FIF regimes is to require a New Zealand resident to pay tax on the resident’s share of the undistributed passive income of a foreign entity in which the resident has an interest. See ¶26-038 and ¶26110. The purpose of the settlor regime is to subject to New Zealand tax the undistributed income of a trust with non-resident trustees if any settlor of that trust is resident in New Zealand. The definition of “residence” for both an individual and a company is a key element in both the settlor and international tax regimes. A resident may not cease temporarily or regularly to be a resident to avoid either the control test and income attribution under the branch equivalent regime or the settlor designation under the trust regime. See ¶25-185. Additionally, residents are not allowed to temporarily lose their residential status in order to receive a taxable distribution from a trust or company without incurring New Zealand income tax. Principle of territoriality  The extent to which the Income Tax Act 2007 should have extraterritorial effect was discussed in Alcan New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,125 at 10,134, where the High Court said: It is a general principle of statutory construction that the legislature intends Acts of Parliament not to have effect outside New Zealand. Adapting the general principle of the statement by Lord Scarman in Clark (HMIT) v Oceanic Contractors Inc [1982] BTC 417; [1983] 2 AC 120 at p 145, unless the contrary is expressly enacted, or so plainly implied that the courts must give effect to it, New Zealand legislation is applicable only to New Zealand subjects or to foreigners who by coming to New Zealand, whether for a short or a long time, have made themselves subject to New Zealand jurisdiction. The principle is a rule of construction only. Presence not residence is the test. This principle, as stated by the High Court, was affirmed in C of IR v Alcan New Zealand Ltd (1994) 16 NZTC 11,175 (CA) where the Court of Appeal dismissed the Commissioner’s appeal from the judgment of the High Court. For discussion of the residency tests, see ¶1-120–¶1-140. Law: IT07 subpart YD, s BD 1(4), (5)  ¶5-144 Income treated as having a source in New Zealand The source rules specify the classes of income that are treated as having a source in New Zealand. These are as follows: ▪ Business income — income derived from any business wholly or partly carried on in New Zealand: s YD 4(2). Where the business is partly carried on in New Zealand then the income derived from it will have a New Zealand source to the extent to which it is apportioned to that source under s YD 5. ▪ Contracts — income derived from contracts made in New Zealand except to the extent to which the contract is performed wholly or partly outside New Zealand and the income is  apportioned to a non-New Zealand source under s YD 5. Income derived from contracts made outside New Zealand is also covered if the contract is wholly or partly performed in this country, subject to apportionment to a New Zealand source under s YD 5. See s YD 4(3). ▪ Personal services income — income derived in connection with a person’s employment under s CE 1 (salary, wages, allowances and other emoluments) earned in New Zealand, even if the employer is a non-resident for New Zealand tax purposes, refer to s YD 4(4). The personal services income may be earned in the place where the contract of employment is made, the place where the payment for the services is made, or where the services are actually performed. See further at ¶5-150. ▪ Accident compensation — accident compensation payments as defined under s CF 1(2). See s YD 4(5). ▪ Pensions — any pension or annuity paid out of any superannuation scheme established in New Zealand as well as any pension or annuity paid by the New Zealand Government and any gratuitous payment that is a pension within the meaning of s CF 1(2) if the services are provided in New Zealand. See s YD 4(6). ▪ Land — income derived from the ownership of land in New Zealand, refer to s YD 4(7). This covers not only the straightforward case of receipts of rent but also other receipts such as fines and premiums deemed to be receipts of an income nature by s CC 1. Income derived under any mortgage of land in New Zealand under s YD 4(11)(e). Mortgage interest would be the most common receipt falling within this category. ▪ Personal property use — income derived as consideration for the use of (or the right to use) any personal property in New Zealand if the income is paid by a New Zealand resident, or if paid by a non-resident who is entitled to a deduction, refer to s  YD 4(8). This rule does not, however, apply to royalties having a New Zealand source which have a separate class. ▪ Royalties — □ royalties paid by a New Zealand resident and not paid in connection with a business carried on by the resident overseas through an overseas fixed establishment, or □ royalties paid by a non-resident that are deductible by the non-resident. See s YD 4(9). ▪ Dividends — dividends derived from a New Zealand company, refer to s YD 4(10). Other income such as convertible note interest derived from membership in a New Zealand company and debenture interest where the debenture was issued by a New Zealand company. ▪ Money lent — under s YD 4(11) income from money lent in New Zealand, such as interest or, where the loan transaction is in the form of a commercial bill, a redemption payment, income from securities issued by the New Zealand Government and income derived from debentures issued by a local or public authority. Income derived from money lent outside New Zealand has a New Zealand source when it is lent to: □ a New Zealand resident except to the extent the money lent is used by the resident for the purposes of a business they carry on outside New Zealand through a fixed establishment outside New Zealand and the interest or redemption payment is not apportioned to a New Zealand source under s YD 5(4), or □ a non-resident if the money lent is used by the non-resident for the purposes of a business they carry on in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand. ▪ Disposal of property — income from the disposal of property situated in New Zealand, see s YD 4(12). The rule applies to  both corporeal and incorporeal property and in the case of profits from the sale of real estate the profits would have to be of an income nature by virtue of the provisions of subpart CB. Ascertainment of the situation of property will depend on common law principles. ▪ Beneficiary income — income derived by a beneficiary under a trust to the extent that the income of the trust fund has a source in New Zealand, refer to s YD 4(13). ▪ Products or passengers shipped or embarked in New Zealand — income derived from carrying people or property by air if the transportation leaves from New Zealand, see s YD 4(14). Similarly s YD 4(15) applies to income derived from carrying people or property by sea if the transportation leaves from New Zealand, subject to the apportionment of the income to a New Zealand source under s YD 6. ▪ Insurance — 10% of certain insurance premiums paid to nonresident general insurers under s YD 8: s YD 4(16). Income of a non-resident life insurer with life insurance policies in New Zealand and calculated in accordance with s EY 48. Refer to s YD 4(17). ▪ Partnerships — income from New Zealand partnerships if, treating all the partners as New Zealand resident, the income would have a New Zealand source under other provisions of s YD 4. Refer to s YD 4(17B). ▪ Income through permanent establishment (PE) — income attributable to a PE in New Zealand of a non-resident has a source in New Zealand unless the income is a dividend from a share in a foreign company that is not revenue account property. See s YD 4(17C) for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018. ▪ Income taxable under double tax agreement — income of a nonresident that may be taxed in New Zealand under a double tax  agreement and is not income from sea transport, a premium for general insurance or income of a non-resident life insurer has a source in New Zealand unless the income is a dividend from a share in a foreign company that is not revenue account property. See s YD 4(17D) for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018. ▪ Any other source — Section YD 4(18) is a general catch-all provision, income derived directly or indirectly from any other source in New Zealand. ▪ Business or contracts partly carried out outside New Zealand — in certain circumstances the income and expenditure from a business or contract conducted across international borders must be apportioned, see s YD 5. Once an apportionment has been made under s YD 5, the taxpayer is assessable for the resulting income tax liability. ▪ For income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018, s YD 5B (not s YD 5) applies when a person carries on business activities through a PE in New Zealand. The amount of income and expenditure of the person that must be attributed to the PE are the amounts the PE might be expected to derive and incur if it were a distinct and separate enterprise engaged in the same or similar activities under the same or similar conditions and dealing wholly independently with the person. ▪ Interest or redemption payments — in certain circumstances, where interest or a redemption payment is derived from money lent outside New Zealand to a New Zealand resident for the purposes of a business they carry on outside New Zealand through a fixed establishment outside New Zealand and through which they lend money to another New Zealand resident, the interest or redemption payment must be apportioned to a source in New Zealand under the formula in s YD 5(4). Law: IT07 ss YD 4, YD 5, YD 5B  ¶5-150 Personal services — source of income The source of income is not a legal concept but something that a practical person would regard as a real source of income; the ascertaining of the actual source is a matter of fact. See Nathan v FC of T (1918) 25 CLR 183. In C of IR v Philips’ Gloeilampenfabrieken [1955] NZLR 868, the Court of Appeal accepted that that approach was good law, at least for the purpose of determining the source of income under the head of income derived from any other source in New Zealand (s YD 4(18) of the Income Tax Act 2007). New Zealand domestic law also needs to be read subject to the provisions of the double tax agreements to which New Zealand is a party. See ¶26-425. The New Zealand approach Case E46 (1982) 5 NZTC 59,277 concerned an army officer posted overseas for two years. The Taxation Review Authority held that the salary received during the term of the posting continued to have a source in New Zealand. In its judgment the Authority cited the decisions of the High Court of Australia in FC of T v French (1957) 98 CLR 398 and FC of T v Mitchum (1965) 113 CLR 401 and said that in the latter case the court did not lay down any firm rule that the source of income is the place where the work is done. The Authority said: Bearing in mind the above factors and that O’s income continued to emanate from a computer at Porirua as it had when he served in New Zealand so that only the actual paying office had changed … his army salary was income derived directly or indirectly from a New Zealand source in terms of sec. 243(2)(r) of the Act [s YD 4(18) of the Income Tax Act 2007]. The Authority went on to say that the taxpayer’s salary was deemed to have a source in New Zealand under another provision, s 243(2) (c) of the 1976 Act (s YD 4(4) of the Income Tax Act 2007). See ¶5144. The taxpayer was caught: … by sec. 243(2)(c) in that his salary as an army officer was “earned in New Zealand in the service of any employer or  principal …” [The] emphasis is on “entitlement” so that para. (c) of subsec. (2) of sec. 243 can … be said to cover all salaries, wages, allowances and emoluments, the entitlement to which arises in New Zealand. Although O performed the service of labour in Redland, he obtained or was entitled to remuneration as a result of New Zealand legislation. The Australian approach The position in Australia is that the Income Tax Assessment Act provides for an exemption for income derived from sources outside Australia where that income is assessable in the country in which it is derived. The approach taken by the Australian courts in this context is that the source of remuneration for services rendered is not a legal concept but something that a practical person would regard as the real source of income. The source of remuneration for services rendered is usually the place where those services are performed, although that will not always be the case. C of T (NSW) v Cam and Sons Ltd (1936) 4 ATD 32 concerned the source of wages paid to fishermen who had been engaged in New South Wales to go on fish trawling voyages off the coasts of Victoria and New Zealand. The trawling was done in the open sea, and each voyage lasted from nine to 25 days. The Supreme Court of New South Wales held that the wages earned should be apportioned in proportion to the wage earning time spent in and out of the territorial waters and that only the wages attributable to the time spent within the territorial waters were derived from a source in New South Wales. In his judgment, Jordan CJ noted that a source of income commonly consists of several factors, and the character of the source may depend upon which of those factors is dominant. In relation to personal services income, Jordan CJ said (at 33): Where income is derived from wages or salary, again the source has several factors. Personal exertion may be involved in negotiating and obtaining the contract of employment, in performing the stipulated services, and in obtaining payment for them. In the present instance, for example, in the case of all the men concerned, in a very real sense it may be said that the source of their wages consisted of the three elements of getting  the job, doing it, and getting paid for it. Which of these factors is the most important element of the source in any given case depends upon the facts of that case. In addition, multiple incomes derived from multiple sources may be apportioned according to those sources. FC of T v French FC of T v French (1957) 98 CLR 398 concerned an engineer employed by the Colonial Sugar Refining Co Ltd. During each year since 1943, the taxpayer had gone to New Zealand as an inspecting engineer for the company. During the period of absence, the company continued the usual arrangement of paying the taxpayer’s monthly salary into his Sydney bank account. In 1950, he spent 16 days working in New Zealand, and he claimed that the salary of £110 on account thereof was exempt from Australian income tax. By a majority, the High Court of Australia accepted that view. The case was treated on the footing that month by month the taxpayer does his work in this or that place and thereby earns his salary. In this case, it is the personal exertion of the taxpayer that produces the income and the real source of the income in any practical sense must be the place where the personal exertion takes place. The locality of the real source of the income of £110 therefore was in New Zealand. The majority of the High Court in French’s case took the place where the services were performed as the decisive factor determining the source of the taxpayer’s income. The factors of the place where the contract of employment was made and the place where the remuneration was payable were not relied upon. FC of T v Mitchum However, in FC of T v Mitchum (1965) 113 CLR 401, it was held that the place where the services are performed does not always determine the source of personal services income. Barwick CJ commented that: The conclusion as to the source of income for the purposes of the Act is a conclusion of fact. There is no statutory definition of “source” to be applied, the matter being judged as one of  practical reality. In each case, the relative weight to be given to the various factors which can be taken into consideration is to be determined by the tribunal entitled to draw the ultimate conclusion as to source. In my opinion, there are no presumptions and no rules of law which require that that question be resolved in any particular sense. Consequently, it became necessary to decide what the source was of the income of the taxpayer and that was a matter of fact for the court to decide. When income is received for services rendered, there is no rule of law that requires a conclusion that the source of the relevant income is in the place where the services are performed. Law: IT07 s YD 4(4), (18)  ¶5-155 Source of income in e-commerce environment The Income Tax Act 2007 imposes income tax on income derived from a business wholly or partly carried on in New Zealand. Practical problems arise in an e-commerce environment in deciding exactly from where income is sourced. Traditionally, income is sourced in the jurisdiction where the transaction occurs or where title and risk pass to the purchaser. For example, a United States company that sells various items to several overseas countries by mail order catalogue will have its income taxed in the United States. A similar transaction carried out over the Internet might appear to be more complex, but the analogy with mail order is useful. Example 1: A New Zealand resident purchases a gift for his sister from an online catalogue while on holiday in Australia. The order is placed and payment made through a credit card company based in the United States. The company selling the goods is based in England. It sends the gift to the buyer’s sister who lives in Singapore. Depending on the mail order company’s other activities, its income from the sale would most likely be taxed in England.  As discussed in ¶5-144, the Income Tax Act treats a number of classes of income as sourced or derived from New Zealand. The categories relevant to the e-commerce environment are listed below. Income from any business wholly or partly carried on in New Zealand (s YD 4(2)) In an e-commerce environment, the types of transactions likely to constitute a business wholly or partly carried on in New Zealand include trading in merchandise and the provision of services. Preliminary or marketing activities are unlikely to be caught by this provision. The more interactive a website is, the more probable it is that the party offering goods and services will be carrying on business in New Zealand. A non-interactive website using an offshore server that merely provides advertising is unlikely to be considered to be carrying on business in New Zealand. On the other hand, a website that: ▪ provides contact with New Zealand customers ▪ has a New Zealand server ▪ targets potential New Zealand customers, and ▪ is tailored to the New Zealand environment is far more likely to be considered to be carrying on business in New Zealand. Once a non-resident is regarded as wholly or partly carrying on business in New Zealand, in the absence of relief under a relevant double taxation agreement the issue becomes one of apportionment of income and profits to New Zealand and other sources. Income from contracts made or performed in New Zealand (s YD 4(3)) The issue of whether a contract has been either made or wholly or partly performed in New Zealand becomes complex where Internet transactions are concerned. The following example illustrates some  of the inherent difficulties in deciding where an e-commerce contract is made. Example 2: Using an electronic bidding system, a United States manufacturer emails qualified suppliers throughout the world notifying them that a job is up for tender and providing them with access to information through the Internet. The suppliers use the system to return their bids. A New Zealand bidder is successful. Contract law principles would dictate that the contract is made where the bid has been accepted, ie the United States location. This would expose the New Zealand bidder to United States tax on any profit on the supply. However, the New Zealand bidder would receive double tax agreement (DTA) relief provided it had no permanent establishment in the United States. Therefore, as prudent business practice, vendors should clearly state on the website whether the data constitutes an invitation to treat or an offer. If it is an offer, the foreign bidder would be taxed in its own jurisdiction. Income from contracting to provide a service may be caught by the source rule covering “contracts made or performed in New Zealand”.  Income from employment earned in New Zealand (s YD 4(4)) As far as income from employment (including salaries and wages) (see ¶5-051) is concerned, most DTAs provide that an employee will be taxed in New Zealand only if he or she has been “present” in New Zealand for 183 days in any 12-month period. This has repercussions for workers who are employed on a telecommuting basis. Example 3: A New Zealand software company that operates in a highly specialised field decides to recruit new staff overseas. Two employees are hired, one from the United States and one from Canada. Both new employees telecommute, communicating with their new employer and their fellow workers solely by email and telephone. Neither employee has any plans to move to New Zealand. Some commentators have suggested that, because the relevant wording in DTAs requires only a “presence” in New Zealand (rather than a physical presence), an employee who is “virtually present” in New Zealand should be taxed in New Zealand. The better view may be that an employee must be physically present in New Zealand to be taxed in New Zealand. The idea of a “virtual presence” being sufficient runs against a basic cornerstone of taxing the derivation of income — namely, it is taxed where the physical effort takes place. Depending on the domestic laws that apply in  the Canadian and United States jurisdictions, each employee in the above example may be taxed in his or her own jurisdiction.  Royalties (s YD 4(9)) Many e-commerce transactions potentially involve the payment of royalties to non-residents. The OECD technical advisory group (TAG) on the Treaty clarification of issues arising from e-commerce published its final report in February 2001. The report identifies a number of typical e-commerce transactions and analyses them in terms of being either business profits or royalties. If the products are provided by an offshore party and income is classified as business profits, that offshore party will generally not be subject to income tax in the purchaser’s jurisdiction unless it has a permanent establishment (PE) there. If income from the products is classified as a royalty, it will be subject to NRWT. The TAG report is considered to be favourable towards online vendors because the majority of the receipts have been classified as business profits. Therefore, unless the vendor has a PE in the foreign jurisdiction, it will escape tax in that jurisdiction. Income from the following information products has been classified by TAG as business profits: downloading of digital products; updates and addons; online shopping portals; online professional services; digital products downloaded for single use; applications hosting online auctions; search and retrieval of information; advertising; data delivery services; online technical support; streaming audio and video; subscriptions to websites; data warehousing; and revenues from affiliate programs. In contrast, income from the following items has been classified by TAG as royalties: use of copyrighted content (ie the right to publish or display copyrighted content); access to an interactive website; downloading and commercial exploitation (ie the right to reproduce and sell a product); and use of undivulged technical information (eg trade secrets). Income derived from the disposal of New Zealand property (s YD 4(12))  For income to fall within this category, the property in question must be situated in New Zealand when the sale (or other disposal) is concluded. Sometimes this will be clear-cut — for example, if an order for goods is lodged by email and paid for by credit card while the goods are held in New Zealand. On the other hand, if the sale is concluded while the goods are out of New Zealand, there is no New Zealand source. E-commerce makes the distinction between the provision of goods, services and intangibles more difficult to determine. For example, the sale of a magazine or newspaper will normally be treated as the sale of goods. Where the magazine or newspaper is delivered digitally rather than on paper, the question arises whether it is the provision of goods or whether it is a service that is being provided (which would be outside the scope of this provision of the Income Tax Act) or a licence to use the copyright. This is a difficult area of the law and will require careful consideration of the facts in each case. It is generally accepted that, for the purpose of indirect or consumption taxes (such as GST), the provision of a digital product is not the provision of goods. Income derived from any other source in New Zealand (s YD 4(18)) This provision of the Income Tax Act has not been utilised to a great extent by Inland Revenue (IR). In the absence of provisions specifically designed to capture e-commerce income it considers to be sourced in New Zealand, IR may decide to make more use of this catch-all provision. Law: IT07 s YD 4  INCOME ¶5-160 Introduction to ascertaining a taxpayer’s income One of the first steps in determining a person’s income tax liability for the income year is to ascertain the person’s income. Whether an amount derived by a person is income is determined from case law (see ¶5-021 and ¶5-031) and Pt C of the Income Tax Act 2007 (see  ¶5-162). Income derived is then further categorised into assessable income, exempt income, excluded income and non-residents’ foreign-sourced income. See ¶1-055, ¶1-163–¶1-170.  ¶5-162 Main items of income Broadly, Pt C of the Income Tax Act 2007 defines the concept of income for income tax purposes. In some cases, the legislation redefines the capital–revenue boundary set by case law. Amounts derived are categorised in Pt C as follows: ▪ general rules (subpart CA) ▪ income from business or trade-like activities (subpart CB) ▪ income from holding property (excluding equity) (subpart CC) ▪ income from equity (subpart CD) ▪ employee or contractor income (subpart CE) ▪ income from living allowances, foreign superannuation, compensation and government grants (subpart CF) ▪ recoveries (subpart CG) ▪ adjustments (subpart CH) ▪ income from voluntary activities (subpart CO) ▪ income from portfolio investment entities (subpart CP) ▪ attributed income from foreign equity (subpart CQ) ▪ income from insurance (subpart CR) ▪ income from petroleum mining (subpart CT — see ¶28-120) ▪ income from mineral mining (subpart CU — see ¶28-053)  ▪ income specific to certain entities (subpart CV) ▪ exempt income (subpart CW) ▪ excluded income (subpart CX), and ▪ terminating provisions (subpart CZ). Law: IT07 Pt C  ¶5-167 Income under ordinary concepts An amount is income of a person if it is the person’s income under ordinary concepts. This catch-all provision is intended to include in income any receipts that do not fall specifically within any of the categories set out in Pt C of the Income Tax Act 2007. Whether an amount is income under ordinary concepts requires a review of case law. See ¶5-021. Example 1: Two people received interest from the ACC on back payments of earnings-related compensation. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue considered that the payment received was interest under common law principles; therefore, it was income under ordinary concepts and subject to tax. The High Court rejected the Commissioner’s argument. The payment made by the ACC was a penalty payable by the ACC for its inefficiency. Further, the payment did not fall within the definition of “interest” as defined in the Income Tax Act 1994. See C of IR v Buis (2005) 22 NZTC 19,278.  Inland Revenue subsequently issued QB 09/03, “Decisions on application of section CA 1(2) — common law interest and income under ordinary concepts” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 5, July 2009 at 25). The Commissioner does not accept the correctness of the decision in C of IR v Buis (2005) 22 NZTC 19,278 as a statement of the general principles for “common law interest” payments. The Commissioner does not agree that the definition of “interest” in s YA 1 is a codification of the taxation of all forms of interest.  In many instances payments that might be described as akin to “interest” under common law or ordinary concepts are not connected with “money lent” and so do not fall within the definition under s YA 1 (see ¶5-268). Transactions that do not fall within the scope of s CC 4(1) may well be governed by s CA 1(2) as a general rule. Example 2: Gains realised by sale or maturity of government stock were taxable income. The transactions were part of a finance company’s business activity. It was not necessary to consider the possible application of s 65(2)(l) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s CA 1(2)) where a taxpayer’s source of income was from business which was the subject of s 65(2)(a) (s CB 1). See AA Finance Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,383 (CA).  See also Duggan v C of IR 73 ATC 6001 and Reid v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,624. Grants made to supplement trading receipts, to assist in meeting revenue expenditure or for the purposes of carrying on a business are also likely to be taxable under s CA 1(2). However, grants are generally not taxable when they relate to specific capital expenditure, or to expenditure that is not linked to the carrying on of the person’s business. See, for example, MacLean v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,035, Poulter v Gayjon Processes Ltd [1985] BTC 112 and Watson v Samson Bros (1959) 38 TC 346. Further, in some cases, the grant received may be excluded income — see ¶5-760. In May 2017, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/05, “Income tax — whether YouTube receipts are taxable” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 45), which briefly discusses “income under ordinary concepts” and concludes that, where a business does not exist, YouTube receipts may still be taxable under s CA 1 (or s CB 3 — see ¶5-192). Law: IT07 ss CA 1(2), YA 1  Income from business or trade-like activities ¶5-172 Taxation of amounts derived from a business Any amount that a person derives from a business is income of the person, provided the amount is not of a capital nature. Test of business The word “business” is defined for the purposes of the Income Tax Act 2007 as including any profession, trade, or undertaking carried on for profit. Consequently, the fundamental notion of the concept of a business is the exercise of an activity in an organised and coherent way to attain the end result of a profit. See ¶5-175. The question of whether a taxpayer is in business involves two aspects. These are the nature of the activities, which must amount to a profession, trade, or undertaking, and the intention with which the taxpayer engages in those activities (the venture must be carried on for profit). An intention to make a profit is sufficient, even though, when looked at realistically, there seems to be no real prospect that that goal can be attained. Example 1: Expenses were deductible where the evidence showed that the taxpayer intended to carry on a farming activity for pecuniary profit. The fact that the profit expectation is not realised is not a ground for saying that the activity is a hobby and not conducted for gaining assessable income. See Case P52 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,356.  Whether the venture is carried on with the required intention turns on the expressed intention of the person and an evaluation of the person’s conduct. Example 2: The essential test as to whether a business exists is the intention of the taxpayer as evidenced by his conduct, and the various tests decided in earlier cases are merely  tests to ascertain the existence of that intention. See Grieve v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,682.  See, also, Edgecombe v C of IR (1991) 13 NZTC 8,140. Intention Matters that may be considered in ascertaining a person’s intention are: ▪ statements by the person as to the person’s intentions ▪ the nature of the activity ▪ the period over which the person engages in that activity ▪ the scale of operations and the volume of transactions ▪ the commitment of time, money and effort, the pattern of activity, the financial results and whether the operations involved are of the same kind and are carried on in the same way as those that are characteristic of ordinary trade in the line of business in which the venture was conducted. See Grieve v C of IR (1984) 6 NZTC 61,682. After the Grieve case, subsequent decisions of the Taxation Review Authority have held that there must be a sufficient level of activity to go with the intention of making a profit. The Grieve case involved a somewhat liberal interpretation as to what constitutes a “business”. However, it should be noted that after C of IR v Stockwell (1992) 14 NZTC 9,190 the equilibrium may have been restored because in that case it was felt that a substantial structure will be needed to meet the “business” criteria. Law: IT07 ss CB 1, YA 1  ¶5-175 Intention of making a profit  The profit, which the taxpayer must intend to gain, as determined in the definition of “business”, must be a profit in money or money’s worth as ascertained on ordinary commercial principles affecting the type of undertaking in question and is not to be equated with profits for tax purposes. Some tax benefits may be taken into account in determining whether the venture is viable. These include the incentives that, for special types of activities award greater deductions or allowances than would otherwise be available or allow revenue items to be dealt with on a special basis, as is the case with standard values and notional values of livestock. Therefore, capital expenditure and incentive deductions should be disregarded in determining whether a business is carried on for profit. Real activities carried on for profit must be present before there may be a business. Example 1: An investor who gave money to a confidence trickster in the belief that it would be invested in speculative purchases could not claim a deduction for his losses. There had been no property purchases and a business could not exist only in the mind of the taxpayer. The volume of activity necessary to establish whether a business does in fact exist depends on the nature of the business activities. See Inglis v FC of T 80 ATC 4001.  Example 2: No farming business was being carried on because all the taxpayer had done was acquire land. There was insufficient farming activity. See Case G19 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,079.  Example 3: A taxpayer was in the business of renting property because he owned a number of houses, had been engaged in this activity for several years and had committed a considerable amount of money to this activity. See Case G44 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,170.  See, also, Case Q30 (1993) 15 NZTC 5,145, C of IR v Port Chalmers Waterfront Workers Union (1996) 17 NZTC 12,523 (CA).  Business activities may be carried on by an agent or an independent contractor who does the work. It is a matter of degree and the distinction is hard to draw. Example 4: The Court of Appeal found that a forestry business was not being carried on by an investor because he paid an agent to plant, maintain and harvest a forest and exercised no direction, control or supervision of the agent in question, and he had no right to see or obtain information about the work actually being done as contracted. See Pukepine Sawmills Ltd v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,114.  Example 5: In contrast to Pukepine, the High Court in AM Bisley & Co Ltd v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,082 found that Company A (which paid Company B $298 per acre to establish and cultivate forestry land) was in the business of forestry. Factors supporting this conclusion were that Company A had the right to direct the employment of a forester or consultant, the right to receive management reports and physical involvement by way of site visits and overall interest and concern in the venture.  An isolated transaction does not in itself stop a finding that a business has been carried on though, generally, there will be a frequency of transactions or some continuity of effort. Intention to make a profit Organised commercial operations may be embarked upon without any motivation of profit making, but the operations may, nonetheless, amount to the carrying on of a business. Example 6: A full-time evangelist was supported by unsolicited donations for a period of eight years. Other than those of a personal nature given as a mark of esteem or respect, the donations were regarded as gifts and assessable as business profits. The evangelistic activities were carried on with the intention of making a profit. See G v C of IR [1961] NZLR 994.  See also Land Projects Ltd v C of IR [1964] NZLR 723. Hobby or business An intention to engage in activities that amount to no more than the pursuit of a hobby should not be equated with an intention to make a profit from a business. Example 7: Mr TP went deer hunting in his spare weekends. The deer that he shot were sold to cover some of the costs involved. Did Mr TP intend to make a profit from the hunting activities? The court held that the dominant motive of Mr TP was not to produce income but it was, rather, for recreational purposes. See Case D54 (1980) 4 NZTC 60,825.  A person’s religious activities may amount to the carrying on of a business when accompanied by an intention that the activities should result in income. See Case H106 (1986) 8 NZTC 707. Illegal activities Income derived from any illegal business or activity will be treated for tax purposes as if it were derived from a legitimate business. See Case Q3 (1993) 15 NZTC 5,033. However, in A Taxpayer v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,350, the Court of Appeal held that money stolen by an accountant from his employer was not assessable income to the accountant. This case led to a change in the law. See further at ¶5-227. Law: IT07 ss CB 1, YA 1  ¶5-178 Commencement of business — preliminary expenses In some circumstances, it has been decided that no business exists because the activities in question were undertaken before the business had begun.  Example 1: A 350ha property purchased in 1977 had not been committed to a farming business four years later. The taxpayer had started some capital works to provide a temporary place to live and a place to store equipment, and he had done some draining and clearing work. These amounted only to preparation of the land for farming and not the commencement of farming. See Case G36 (1985) 7 NZTC 1,133.  Example 2: A naval officer purchased a farm intending to prepare it for full-time farming before retirement from the navy. Most of the land was leased to a neighbour, with some maintenance work being performed and a few stock being run on the remaining land. Losses incurred were not deductible. The taxpayer had no serious intention to achieve a profit, and his work amounted only to the preservation of a capital asset. See Case H63 (1986) 8 NZTC 460.  See also Case S39 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,264. By their nature preliminary expenses are neither incurred in carrying on a business or in deriving assessable income. Therefore, these expenses will not satisfy the nexus test for deductibility under s DA 1. Examples of preliminary expenses include costs involved in issuing share capital or legal costs for preparation of a company’s constitution.  ¶5-181 Termination of business The intention to make a profit may be negated when the incomeproducing activities are carried on with a view to their sale. Example 1: Taxpayers were no longer in the business of farming once they had decided to sell their farm property. See Case F31 (1983) 6 NZTC 59,712.  Example 2:  A taxpayer obtained a neglected farm property. He carried out improvements to the property with a view to selling the property but also carrying on of some grazing and cropping activities. Although the dominant purpose was to sell the property, the facts were sufficient to establish that pending the sale he was carrying on a farming activity. See Tweddle v FC of T (1942) 7 ATD 186.  Example 3: A couple who sold several properties within a three-year period were not liable for income tax on the gains because the sales were made to wind down their real estate portfolio, rather than to make a profit. See Case S86 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,538.  ¶5-184 Asset sold as part of business operation When property sold was not originally acquired for the purpose of dealing, any amount derived may, nevertheless, be income of the vendor if it is sold as part of the normal business operations being carried on. Before a sale may be made in the operation of a business, it must be a business carried on by the vendor. The question then becomes whether a particular transaction constitutes an operation in the carrying on of that business. Example 1: The sale of an investment in a finance company was not part of an insurance company’s normal business. There was only a weak nexus between the realisation of the investment and the carrying on of the insurance business, particularly when the shares were not acquired with the intention of sale. The sale of the investment was the sale of a capital asset. Accordingly, the sale proceeds were not assessable under s 65(2)(a) of the Income Tax Act 1976 as profits or gains derived from any business conducted by the company. See National Insurance Company of New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,489.  Example 2: Transactions involving government stock were part of a finance company’s business of deriving profit from borrowing and lending money. The gains made from the transactions were assessable income, being profits or gains derived from the company’s business. See AA Finance Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,383.  See also Californian Copper Syndicate (Limited and Reduced) v Harris (Surveyor of Taxes) (1904) 5 TC 159. When property is acquired as an investment and later sold, any profits may be taxable. Example 3: A bank or an insurance company realises investments as part of what is truly the carrying on of a business. See C of IR v Auckland Savings Bank [1971] NZLR 569, Chamber of Manufactures Insurance Ltd v FC of T 84 ATC 4315.  Where an insurance company can show that the long-term purpose of its share investments is not to meet claims but to provide a reserve for rebuilding purposes, then any amount received on realisations made by way of share exchanges may not be income for income tax purposes. See State Insurance Office v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,035 and ¶5-213. Any amount derived from a transaction entered into otherwise than in the ordinary course of carrying on a business may be income. The Full Court of the High Court of Australia said in FC of T v The Myer Emporium Ltd 87 ATC 4363 at 4,366–4,367; (1987) 163 CLR 199 at 209–210: Although it is well settled that a profit or gain made in the ordinary course of carrying on a business constitutes income, it does not follow that a profit or gain made in a transaction entered into otherwise than in the ordinary course of carrying on the taxpayer’s business is not income. Because a business is carried on with a view to profit, a gain made in the ordinary course of carrying on the business is invested with the profitmaking purpose, thereby stamping the profit with the character of income …. Nor does the fact that a profit or gain is made as the result of an isolated venture or a ‘one-off’ transaction preclude it from being properly characterised as income (F.C. of T. v Whitfords Beach Pty. Ltd. 82 ATC 4031 at pp. 4036–4037, 4042; (1982) 150 C.L.R. 355 at pp. 366–367, 376). The authorities establish that a profit or gain so made will constitute  income if the property generating the profit or gain was acquired in a business operation or commercial transaction for the purpose of profit-making by the means giving rise to the profit. A purchaser of a business may derive income from assets if the assets are later sold for a gain as part of the person’s business activity. Example 4: The taxpayer company was a stock and station agent whose business included the provision of financial services to farmers. In the process of purchasing a business, the taxpayer acquired book debts that it subsequently recovered for more than their written-down value. The Court of Appeal ruled that the gains made on the debt recoveries were part of the taxpayer’s business activity and therefore assessable under s 65(2)(a) of the Income Tax Act. See C of IR v Wrightson Ltd (1999) 19 NZTC 15,176.  ¶5-187 Receipt received for right to trade A distinction can be made between a person parting with some of the person’s property and the use of that property as a method of trading. When a person does in fact part with an asset, such as the right to trade, the receipt is normally capital. However, a distinction is to be drawn between that type of case and the case in which a person acquires a right with the intention of reselling it. Example: Profits arising from the sale of motel franchises were assessable as profit derived from the carrying on of a business. The selling or promoting of the franchise system was the business carried on and accordingly the income was assessable. See Consolidated Motels Ltd v C of IR, Trailways Motel Systems Ltd v C of IR (1976) 2 NZTC 61,097.  ¶5-189 Tax treatment of gifts received by volunteer workers  Inland Revenue’s policy on the tax treatment of gifts received by volunteer workers in New Zealand is set out in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 3, September 1994 at 8. Generally, gifts will be income when they are a product of the person’s activities. A gift will not be income if it is a personal gift made purely as a mark of affection, esteem or respect. See G v C of IR [1961] NZLR 994. Although there are no firm rules as to whether a particular gift is income, gifts to a volunteer worker will be included in income if they are a relevant product of the volunteer’s activities. However, each case must be judged on its own merits. The following factors should be considered in determining whether a gift is assessable income: ▪ How and why the gift was made. A gift received by a person in a working capacity in a particular area indicates that the gift should be included in assessable income. ▪ Is the gift a common incident of the recipient’s occupation or calling? A gift made to a person in an occupation where gifts are commonly received indicates that the gift should be included in assessable income. ▪ Is the gift solicited? A solicited gift tends to indicate that the gift constitutes assessable income. ▪ Whether the gift can be traced to gratitude engendered by a service the recipient has performed for the donor. If the recipient has not been remunerated fully for some service rendered to the donor, this tends to indicate that the gift constitutes assessable income. ▪ The motives of the donor. The assessable income of a person is unlikely to include a personal gift made purely as a mark of affection, esteem or respect. ▪ Whether the recipient relies on such gifts for regular maintenance. A reliance on gifts for regular personal  maintenance indicates that the gift constitutes assessable income. Law: IT07 ss CA 1(2), CB 1, CE 1  ¶5-192 Profit-making undertaking or scheme — s CB 3 An amount derived from carrying on or carrying out an undertaking or scheme entered into or devised for the purpose of making a profit is income. As business profits are taxable under s CB 1 (see ¶5172), s CB 3 catches any residual transactions that are neither a business nor the realisation of property bought for the purpose of sale. However, there must be involvement in an undertaking or scheme for profit and the attainment of profit. In principle, s CB 3 applies to undertakings or schemes affecting land as well as personal property, although the taxation of land transactions will be governed by the provisions of ss CB 6A–CB 23. The words “undertaking” and “scheme” are defined according to everyday usage. They refer to a plan of action or an enterprise. Consequently, the three elements required to satisfy this test are that there must be: ▪ an amount derived ▪ the carrying on or carrying out of a profit-making undertaking or scheme, and ▪ a nexus between the profit-making undertaking or scheme and the amount derived. The purpose of the taxpayer must be the dominant purpose and must be determined at the time at which the scheme or undertaking is entered into, not at the time when the property is acquired: see Gilmour v C of IR [1968] NZLR 136. The scheme must produce income not a capital gain. Therefore, the realisation of a capital asset in the most advantageous manner is insufficient to fall within this category of income. See Eunson v C of  IR [1963] NZLR 278, C of IR v Walker [1963] NZLR 339. The undertaking or scheme must have the character of a business deal. See McClelland v FC of T 70 ATC 4115. This case has been accepted as good law in New Zealand (see Duff v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,131 (CA)) but not in Australia (see FC of T v Whitfords Beach Pty Ltd 82 ATC 4031). Example 1: Surplus property was acquired by the taxpayer for resale so the proceeds could be applied to develop the portion actually required. The requisite character of a profitmaking scheme was found to exist. See Buck v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,221.  See also Case Q39 (1993) 15 NZTC 5,187, C of IR v Renouf Corporation Ltd (1998) 18 NZTC 13,914. The approach to be taken in ascertaining whether an undertaking or scheme was entered into or devised for the purpose of making a profit is similar to the approach taken under s CB 4 in determining whether property was acquired for the purpose of disposal: see ¶5197 and ¶5-200. Where a taxpayer derives income, under s CB 3, from an undertaking or scheme that was entered into for the purpose of making a profit, the taxpayer will be allowed a deduction for the cost of the property as if it were acquired from a third party immediately after the commencement of the undertaking or scheme. The deduction will be for an amount equal to the market value of the property at the time of acquisition. In May 2017, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/05, “Income tax — whether YouTube receipts are taxable” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 45), which briefly discusses a profit-making undertaking or scheme and concludes that, where a business does not exist, YouTube receipts may still be taxable under s CB 3 (or s CA 1 — see ¶5-167). Uncompleted scheme  When a person acquires property that is the subject of an uncompleted undertaking or scheme, the person is liable under s CB 3 only if the person continues with the scheme and carries it on as an undertaking or scheme in the person’s own right. See Official Receiver in Bankruptcy (trustee, estate of William Fox, known as Rankin, dec’d) v FC of T (1956) 96 CLR 870. When a sale is made after a scheme or undertaking has been abandoned, for whatever reason, the vendor may not be taxed on the resultant profits. See Kratzmann v FC of T 70 ATC 4043. In each case, it is a question of fact whether the scheme can be said to have been abandoned or merely redirected. There is always the possibility that any profits made after abandonment are income according to ordinary concepts (see ¶5-167). Law: IT07 ss CB 1, CB 3  ¶5-197 Personal property acquired for purpose of disposal — s CB 4 An amount derived from disposing of personal property when the property was acquired for the purpose of disposing of it is income. The basic inquiry is to the purpose of the person at the date of acquiring the property. See ¶5-200. Section CB 4 does not apply unless positive steps have been taken by the person in acquiring the property. It does not apply in the case of passive acquisitions such as gifts and inheritances. Example 1: A taxpayer was granted an option to buy some land by will. The option was for £20,000. It was exercised by the taxpayer and sold the same day for £47,000. The court held that the profit/gain was not assessable under the forerunner to s 65(2)(e) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s CB 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007). The taxpayer received the right to purchase the property under the will, and the exercise of the option simply provided the means to possession of the property devised. See AG Healing & Co Ltd v C of IR [1964] NZLR 222.  Example 2:  A taxpayer entered into an agreement to purchase a resort motel, including its chattels. His primary purpose in purchasing the motel was to secure its excellent site. A real estate agent approached the taxpayer before settlement with a potential lessee for the motel. The taxpayer entered into a 10-year lease and sold the motel’s chattels to the lessee. The Taxation Review Authority held that the profit from the sale of the chattels was not assessable because the taxpayer did not have a sufficient intention to resell the chattels at the time he purchased them. See Case T48 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,325.  Time of acquisition A person acquires property or an interest in property at the time of entering into a binding contract to purchase. See Beetham v C of IR 72 ATC 6042. A further refinement to that proposition is that a sale does not take place until an equitable interest has passed. In Mills v C of IR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,025, the making of a conditional contract for the sale of land was held not to be sufficient to amount to a sale or disposition. On the other hand, in some situations an equitable interest will pass to the purchaser before the contract becomes unconditional and property may be deemed to have been acquired at that time. See, for example, Bevin v Smith (1994) 2 NZ ConvC 191,915; [1994] 3 NZLR 648 (CA). The date of acquisition of land held under an option to purchase is the date on which the option is exercised. See Healing’s case (example 1 above). If an interest in property such as a lease or an option is sold at a profit, the time of acquisition is the date when that interest was acquired. If a contract is rescinded and another entered into, it is the date of entering into the second contract that is relevant. Acquired with the purpose of disposal? The property in question must have been acquired for the purpose of disposing of it. This test of purpose is subjective, requiring consideration of the state of mind of the purchaser at the time of the acquisition of the property. Example 3: TP company derived its income from rent with any cash surplus invested in public company shares from time to time. These shares made up a small part of the overall assets of the company. During the 1977–78 income year, the company spent  $107,000 on share purchases and received $11,600 in dividends and $42,000 in gains on sale. The shares in question were held for anywhere between eight months and three years. The Commissioner ruled that realisation of the shares was assessable. The company objected and stated that their share purchases were for long-term investment combined with the opportunity for growth. Their policy had been to sell the shares when the market rose as a hedge against inflation. Among several issues to be decided was whether the shares were acquired for the purpose of sale under the second limb of s 65(2)(e) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s CB 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007). The Court of Appeal made the following points: ▪ The test of purpose is subjective, requiring the consideration of the state of mind of the purchaser at the time of acquisition of the property. ▪ If there is more than one purpose, the test is whether the dominant purpose is one of sale or other disposition. ▪ Motive, intention and purpose are distinguishable. ▪ If there is a purpose of resale, it is irrelevant if the sale is a means to an end. ▪ The nature of the asset purchased is an important consideration as is the period for which it is held. ▪ It is incorrect to say that the purchase of an asset as a hedge against the depreciating value of money falls outside s 65(2)(e) (s CB 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007). If a taxpayer’s purpose is to sell in the future at a price that, allowing for inflation, is equal to or better than the price at the time of purchase, the purpose is to sell the property even though the motive is to protect savings from inflation. ▪ Sales made in the course of reviewing an investment portfolio held for its potential income yield were different from sales of shares purchased with the primary aim of achieving gains from resale. ▪ The fact that a taxpayer did not expect to retain the property for ever and actually contemplated the possibility of sale does not satisfy the test under the second limb. ▪ A taxpayer who purchases assets with only a general expectation of achieving financial gain in some undefined way will satisfy the onus of proving that there was no purpose of sale. See C of IR v National Distributors Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,346.  The Court of Appeal, in applying these principles, found that the dominant purpose (see ¶5-200) of the taxpayer was to achieve a profit on resale. A dissenting judgment by Doogue J, however, concluded that the second limb (s CB 4) did not apply to a taxpayer who acquired an asset with the clear intention of resale but without  the dominant purpose of profit or gain. Ultimately, much will rest on the individual circumstances of each case, bearing in mind that the onus of proof is on the taxpayer. See also C of IR v National Insurance Company of New Zealand Ltd (1999) 19 NZTC 15,135. In this case the facts indicated that the insurance company was holding the investments outside the insurance business. The Court of Appeal found that the gains made by the insurance company were not assessable as either business profits, profits on the sale of personal property acquired for the purpose of sale or income derived from any other source. Law: IT07 s CB 4  Income from holding property (excluding equity) ¶5-200 Dominant purpose of disposal of property — s CB 4 Section CB 4 will apply when the sole or, if there is more than one purpose at the time property is acquired, the dominant purpose of the person is the disposal of the property in question. This test was established in C of IR v Walker [1963] NZLR 339 and approved by the Privy Council in Holden v C of IR, Menneer v C of IR (1974) 1 NZTC 61,146. A refinement of the test followed in Williams Property Developments Ltd v C of IR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,537 when it was held that a contingent or conditional purpose may still amount to a dominant purpose. Example 1: A taxpayer acquired a property in the expectation that an adjacent property could later be acquired and both properties then transferred to a related company for integration into a development project being carried on by that related company. In these circumstances, the taxpayer’s dominant purpose was the sale of the property. In coming to this view, the court accepted the notion that a conditional purpose may amount to a dominant purpose. If a person buys a piece of land because he or she believes that it will go up in price and that he or she will then be able to resell it at a  profit, it seems open to regard resale at a profit as the dominant purpose, even though the ability to fulfil that purpose depends on the contingency of a rise in value. See Williams Property Developments Ltd v C of IR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,537.  Purpose and intention Section CB 4 will apply where the dominant purpose of the person is the disposal of the property in question. In the context of this section, there is a clear distinction between purpose and intention (see C of IR v National Distributors Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,346, discussed at ¶5-197). A person does not have a purpose of disposal at the date of acquiring shares merely because the possibility of disposal at a later date is contemplated. Moreover, the fact that a purchaser knows at the time of acquisition that the dividend yield from its shares will be small does not necessarily imply that the shares have been purchased for the purpose of disposal. See C of IR v National Insurance Company of New Zealand Ltd (1999) 19 NZTC 15,135 (CA). The time at which the dominant purpose test is applied is at the date of acquisition of the property. See Duff v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,131 (CA). In this context, the cases that consider the time of acquisition (see ¶5-197) are relevant. Where part of the property is sold, the purpose attributed to the purchase of the part will correspond to the dominant purpose of the acquisition of the whole. The courts have drawn a distinction between a taxpayer’s purpose and his or her intention, where the former is a more restricted concept referring to the overall object that the taxpayer has in mind. See Plimmer v C of IR [1958] NZLR 147, Davis v C of IR [1959] NZLR 635. In some cases, the person may adopt the purpose of another party. Example 2: A member of a landowning syndicate transferred some wharf land to a family trust. The High Court attributed the original purpose of acquisition to the trustees. The purpose was for use of the land in a stevedoring business and so the trustees were not treated as having acquired the land for the purpose of resale. See Maritime Trust v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,537.  The issue addressed in C of IR v Wellington Regional Stadium Trust (2005) 22 NZTC 19,445 was whether the trust, in holding events at the Wellington Stadium, was operating a trading undertaking for the purpose of making a profit. The trust contended that its purpose was to construct and operate the stadium and not to make profits from holding events and functions there. The Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the High Court (Wellington Regional Stadium Trust v C of IR (No 3) (2004) 21 NZTC 18,648), which had held that the profits made by the trust from its inherently charitable operations were simply a means to an end, namely to enable the stadium to operate as a going concern, and not an end in themselves. The evidence submitted on behalf of the Trust to the effect that, although the stadium needed to be run in a businesslike way, it was for community benefit and for the economic benefit of the region as a whole, was accepted. The Court of Appeal also ruled that the High Court was right to emphasise the distinction between purpose and intention, and that the case law authorities holding that the words are not synonymous is strong and extends across a number of statutes. QWBA — proceeds from sale of gold In September 2017, the Commissioner released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/08, “Income tax — are proceeds from the sale of gold bullion income?”, which considers whether the proceeds from the sale of gold bullion bought as an investment will be income for tax purposes. The Commissioner’s view in the original draft QWBA issued in February 2016 was that gold bullion bought as an investment would necessarily be acquired for the purpose of disposal and consequently any amounts derived on its disposal would be income under s CB 4. However, when the QWBA was finally issued, the Commissioner’s view had been modified slightly. QB 17/08 now states that, as with any personal property, amounts derived on the disposal of gold will be income under s CB 4 if the gold was acquired for the dominant purpose of disposal. However, the Commissioner considers that the very nature of the asset is a factor that strongly indicates that it was acquired for the dominant purpose of ultimately disposing of it, although there may be  circumstances where she will accept that the dominant purpose in acquiring gold bullion was to retain it for reasons other than eventual disposal. The particular circumstances of the situation need to be carefully considered, and any assertion that gold was not acquired for the dominant purpose of disposal would need to be supported by clear and compelling evidence. Where gold bullion was acquired for the dominant purpose of disposal it will be revenue account property, and the cost of the gold will be deductible under s DB 23. QB 17/08 is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 10, November 2017 at 9. Law: IT07 s CB 4  ¶5-211 Dealers in personal property — s CB 5 Section CB 5 has the effect of taxing any amount derived from disposing of personal property that would have been trading stock if sold in the conduct of the person’s business. In practice, any amount that is taxable under this provision will almost invariably be taxed as a business profit under s CB 1 (see ¶5-172). The application of s CB 5 depends on whether the person was, at the date of disposition, a dealer in the type of property disposed of and, if so, whether the property was disposed of as part of the person’s business. A dealer is a person who buys or sells merchandise or who trades in some commodity in the sense that the property is sold in the same form or condition as it was in when it was acquired. The carrying on of a business as a dealer suggests the organisation of some dealing activity in the course of conduct, even if only for a short period of time. The test of whether a person is a dealer involves application of certain principles. There must be a reasonable frequency of transactions or some continuity of effort in buying or selling property. See Bates v C of IR (1955) 11 ATD 96. Even though a number of transactions are involved, there may be some other explanation for them. Each case is decided on its own facts. A large number of trades in shares did not on its own amount to evidence of dealing in shares where the underlying nature of the taxpayer’s activity was  investment, and the scale and nature of the activity was not enough to amount to a business of share dealing when the transactions were analysed. See Estate of King v C of IR (2008) 23 NZTC 21,729 (CA). Example 1: A superannuation fund that invested in the share market was found to be dealing in shares because of the frequency of its share-trading transactions. In this case, at least 176 share transactions took place over a three-year period. At p 12,292 Temm J said: “The frequency of share dealing transactions is often decisive in deciding whether a taxpayer’s profits are liable to assessment under s 65(2)(e) [of the Income Tax Act 1976, s CB 5 of the Income Tax Act 2007]. The purpose or motive for this kind of business enterprise is of less relevance than the extent of it.” See Piers v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,283.  The Piers case is notable because the ground of assessment (ie that of dealing) is seldom used to catch persons without also catching them under the business provision of s CB 1. However, the High Court construed the two provisions as having separate spheres of operation. The test for dealing is applied at the time at which the property is disposed of. See RO Slacke v C of IR (1970) 1 ATR 696. When the occupation of a person requires dealing with property as an agent, that person is not a dealer in the person’s own right. Example 2: A sharebroker is not a dealer in shares when buying them on behalf of clients. Similarly, a real estate agent when acting in that capacity is not a dealer in land.  For the purposes of s CB 5, the person must be a dealer at the date of disposal. The person’s occupation at the date of acquisition is not relevant. There is a distinction between a dealer and a developer. A land dealer is someone who buys and sells land in substantially the same condition. A developer is not a dealer because that person is not dealing in the same article. See Henderson v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,279. The indivisible nature of most personal property  suggests that this distinction will not be of wide application under s CB 5. Business of dealing Property held and disposed of as a capital asset (including an investment) does not come within s CB 5. See ¶5-031 and ¶10-071. The onus is on the dealer-taxpayer to establish that any transaction was not part of the dealer’s usual business dealing. The onus is a heavy one when the person starts with the great disadvantage that what they assert is contrary to the reasonable inferences to be drawn from their course of conduct as a dealer. When s CB 5 is invoked, the character of the business is to be determined at the date of disposal. However, it does not follow that every disposal by a dealer is necessarily caught, for a property dealer may purchase property as an investment either before or after embarking on the business of dealing and, if its investment character does not change, its subsequent disposal will be the disposal of a capital asset and any amount derived is a capital gain. Example 3: In considering whether the onus of proof has been discharged, it is preferable to look at surrounding circumstances and contemporaneous records and dealings rather than what interested witnesses say at a later date about earlier intentions. See Kenneth James Ltd v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,565.  Law: IT07 s CB 5  ¶5-213 Profits made on the sale of shares — ss CB 3–CB 5 Taxing provisions Company shares are a form of personal property for the purposes of ss CB 4 and CB 5. Profits made on the sale of shares can be taxed primarily according to three situations. These are where the person is in the business of dealing in shares (s CB 5), the shares have been acquired for the purpose of resale (s CB 4) and any amount  derived from the transactions has arisen from a profit-making undertaking or scheme (s CB 3). These matters are largely questions of fact. Commissioner’s approach The Commissioner seems to accept that because shares are purchased with a view to growth in value this does not necessarily make any profit taxable on sale. The Commissioner also seems to accept that shares can be changed from time to time as part of an investment policy by a person and that shares can be purchased with more than one purpose in mind, the dominant purpose being the relevant purpose. An example of this view is reflected in rulings concerning capital gains on shares earned by passive-index funds that simply track a share market index rather than make active investment decisions. Gains on these shares are not considered to fall within s CB 1 or ss CB 3–CB 5. Following a review of the tax position of these types of funds in December 2000, Inland Revenue (IR) advised that it will continue to rule that gains on the equity investments of passive funds are not taxable where certain general criteria are met (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 12, December 2000 at 74). Rulings on these products will be issued for three years only. See also Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 5, December 1992 at 32. In some cases, the proceeds from the sale of shares may be taxed as a dividend to the vendor. See ¶33-175. The Commissioner released two public rulings dealing with the treatment of a subdivision of shares and a disposal of subdivided shares (where the original shares were acquired for disposal) — BR Pub 16/05, “Income tax — treatment of a subdivision of shares under section CB 4”, and BR Pub 16/06, “Income tax — treatment of a disposal of subdivided shares under section CB 4” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 5, June 2016 at 3). The rulings conclude that a subdivision of shares does not result in a disposal of personal property for s CB 4, but that s CB 4 will apply to a disposal of the subdivided shares (where the original shares were acquired for disposal). The central technical issue considered is whether  subdivided shares should be treated as the same or different property from the original shares. The conclusion reached is that they are the same. The rulings apply from 20 May 2016 for an indefinite period. The Commissioner has also released two public rulings dealing which consider whether s CB 4 could apply when rights attached to shares are altered, and when shares with altered rights are disposed of: BR Pub 19/05, “Income tax — treatment of alteration to rights attached to shares under section CB 4”, and BR Pub 19/06, “Income tax — treatment of a disposal of shares with altered rights under section CB 4” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 20). The rulings conclude that the alteration of share rights does not result in a disposal of any shares for the purposes of s CB 4. The shares continue in existence with altered rights. The rulings also conclude that when a shareholder who acquired the shares on revenue account before the alteration disposes of the shares after the alteration, s CB 4 will apply to the disposal. This is because the shares with altered rights are the same property as the shares before the alteration. The Commissioner considers that the contractual doctrine of rescission is not relevant and there is no cancellation and issue of shares when share rights alter. The time of acquisition of the shares with altered rights is the time the shares were acquired before the alteration. The rulings apply from 1 April 2020 for an indefinite period. Note that they replaced BR Pub 17/04 and BR Pub 17/05, which applied from 1 April 2017 to 31 March 2020 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 8). Case law National Distributors If shares have been acquired clearly for resale, any profit will be taxable and a deduction will be allowed if those shares are sold at a loss. See C of IR v Inglis (1992) 14 NZTC 9,180 (CA) and ¶10-660. (If a person was in the business of trading or dealing in shares, any losses incurred in that business would be deductible in the usual way in terms of the second limb of the general permission.) The decision in C of IR v National Distributors Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,346 (CA)  seems consistent with IR’s view; see ¶5-197. The tests to apply in determining whether shares were acquired for the purpose of resale have been considered in the National Distributors case. In its majority decision, the court ruled that: ▪ the key issue was whether the taxpayer’s dominant purpose in acquiring the shares was that of resale ▪ knowledge that the shares would not be owned forever did not by itself make proceeds from a subsequent sale taxable (eg a policy of share trading directed primarily at providing dividend income) ▪ a taxpayer who buys shares for no specific purpose other than general financial benefit will satisfy the onus of proving resale was not the dominant purpose ▪ circumstances relevant in deciding whether the intention of resale existed include the nature of the asset, the number of similar transactions, the period of ownership, and the circumstances of purchase and use, and ▪ in the case of shares, the length of time they are held is of particular importance. In this case, the court noted there was no apparent policy of retaining the shares for their dividend potential, they had not been held on a long-term basis and sales took place when the market had peaked. Excluding those shares purchased for family reasons, the dominant purpose underlying the share purchase was to make a profit on resale. Profits on the sale of investments by “banking and insurance” companies would ordinarily be treated as income under general principles, primarily because those assets are seen as part of the general circulating capital. State Insurance Office However, in State Insurance Office v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,035, gains from share exchange transactions were held not to be taxable.  The issues were whether gains from the share transactions had been realised and whether the share swap transactions (including those with a cash element) were taxable under s 65(2)(a) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (s CB 1) as profits or gains derived from any business. The High Court considered the various New Zealand, English, Australian and Canadian cases on taxation following disposal of investments by banks and insurance companies and found that State Insurance did not trade with investments, its share portfolio was fixed not circulating capital, it had never realised part of its share portfolio to pay claims and that, apart from compulsory acquisition, it had never planned to dispose of shares apart from a few minor tidying-up plans. Consequently, the court held that: ▪ The transactions were all made on capital account. They were sporadic isolated dealings occurring as part of the fixed capital of the insurer. ▪ The dominant purpose of State Insurance’s acquisition of shares was to hold and not to sell them. The investments were a reserve for rebuilding the business should a large number of claims be made that would eliminate some part of circulating capital. ▪ Even if there was a realisation, the share exchanges produced no cash that fell into revenue. There was a mere exchange of shares amounting to a variation of investment. ▪ Disposal of the shares under the compulsory acquisition provisions of the Companies Act 1955 showed that there was no need to sell the securities and was consistent with the taxpayer’s stated policy of holding investments for their return. ▪ The rationale of the banking and insurance cases that held that profit on disposals was income was distinguishable (the businesses were holding investments of a particular level to conform with certain ratios or actuarial levels considered necessary for carrying on business).  ▪ The share portfolio could not be treated as trading stock. State had acquired the shares for long-term retention, with no intention of resale. Following the decision in State Insurance Office, IR confirmed its policy that the sale of shares by insurance companies will be treated as being on revenue account, even where the investments are highly unlikely to be needed for business requirements. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 2, No 3, October 1990 at 2. AA Finance In AA Finance Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,383, the Court of Appeal confirmed that realisations of government stock by a finance company were made on revenue account and were accordingly taxable as income of a business. Government stock holdings were mandatory for finance companies during the income years in question. However, such acquisitions were a necessary incident of the business of borrowing and lending money and could not be considered to be separate from the ordinary trading activities. (It should be noted that the facts in the AA Finance case would now be covered by the financial arrangements rules, which render any amount derived from holding financial instruments to be income.) Rangatira In C of IR v Rangatira Ltd (1995) 17 NZTC 12,182, an investment company’s share trading activities were held by the Court of Appeal to amount to the carrying on of a business. The investment company’s policy was to invest long-term to yield sufficient dividend income for its charitable trust shareholders. However, low dividend yielding shares were sold off regularly to supplement income. The Court of Appeal found that the share sales were a process directed to making gains and this was truly the carrying on of a business. The company’s activity went beyond the creation of a balanced portfolio of income-producing investments. The ruling overturned the High Court’s earlier decision that the company’s activities did not amount to a business relating to the buying and selling of shares. Profits on a number of the company’s share transactions were held to be  assessable by the High Court, but on the basis that they were acquired for the purpose of selling or otherwise disposing of them. The Privy Council reversed the Court of Appeal’s decision on a relatively narrow procedural issue. The Privy Council stated that the question of whether a particular business consists of buying and selling shares for profit depends entirely on the evidence produced as to the nature of the business activity. Whether a taxpayer is carrying on a business of dealing in shares is a matter of fact and degree and a court should not disturb a finding of fact unless it is wrong. The Privy Council stated that it was for the High Court Judge, Gallen J, to assess the reliability of the witnesses and that even though the decision could have gone either way it did not mean that the decision was incorrect. See Rangatira Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,727. National Insurance Co In C of IR v National Insurance Co of New Zealand Ltd (1999) 19 NZTC 15,135, the Court of Appeal held that an insurance company’s investment in a finance company was not acquired for the purpose of selling or otherwise disposing of it. Accordingly, the profits or gains derived from the sale of its shares in the company were not taxable. The fact that the insurance company knew at the time of acquiring the shares that the dividend yield would be quite small did not necessarily imply that the shares were purchased for the purpose of resale. King In King v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,691, the taxpayers engaged a sharebroker to manage some of their offshore investments who was instructed to achieve a certain level of return. The High Court initially held that the sharebroker was the taxpayers’ agent and that he was in the business of share dealing and, because the sharebroker carried out extensive share trading to achieve the required return on investment, it was a necessary inference that his subjective and dominant intention was to acquire shares for the purpose of resale. However, the High Court decision was overturned by the Court of Appeal (Estate of King v C of IR (2008) 23 NZTC 21,729), which  ruled that the nature of the taxpayer’s activity was investment rather than the pursuit of a business, and an intention to sell could not properly be inferred simply from the large number of transactions. Each transaction should be examined individually. Requirements A taxpayer who has made a taxable profit (or a deductible loss) from selling shares during the year, should: ▪ In the case of an individual taxpayer, use the IR 3 tax return, otherwise use the appropriate tax return. ▪ The following details for each share sale should be attached to the return: □ name of company □ number of shares sold □ date of purchase □ date of sale □ cost of shares sold (including brokerage) □ sale price of shares (net after brokerage) □ other expenses (eg interest) □ profit □ loss — if a loss is claimed, details of profits made from previous sales whether in this tax year or earlier □ the purpose for which the taxpayer purchased the shares. If a taxpayer is not sure whether the profits are taxable or losses are deductible, a note should be attached to the return giving details of each share sale.  Summary — share trading Where a person acquires shares with the dominant purpose of reselling them, then, in the year of sale: ▪ the person will be taxed on any profit from the sale (ie the amount by which the sale price less any brokerage exceeds the cost price plus any brokerage) ▪ the person may claim a deduction for any loss on the sale (ie the amount by which the sale price less any brokerage is exceeded by the cost price plus any brokerage) (see ¶10-660), and ▪ expenditure incurred to acquire shares will be deductible and the amount of any difference on resale will be taxable or deductible, as the case may be. For limitations to group loss offset, see ¶10-660 and ¶18-060. Law: IT07 ss CB 3–CB 5  ¶5-215 Taxation of assets — hedge against inflation If shares are acquired with the dominant purpose of resale, proceeds from the selling of the shares will be taxed. This principle also applies to shares purchased as a hedge against inflation. See the Court of Appeal decision of C of IR v National Distributors Ltd (1989) 11 NZTC 6,346 and ¶5-197. Tax will not arise, however, when the purpose of acquiring shares was to obtain dividend income. The same result applies when property was acquired with no clear purpose in mind but simply to benefit the purchaser’s financial position in some unformulated way and without any clear consideration as to the advantages of retention or resale. See CMI Services Pty Ltd v FC of T 90 ATC 4428, which seems to suggest that an investment undertaking, managed along conservative lines, will generate taxable profits when the investments are switched to protect the capital value of the fund, and FC of T v Equitable Life and General Insurance Co Ltd 90 ATC 4438, which seems to suggest that taxable profits are not produced where  investment is not by way of trading but to protect the capital value of the portfolio. Law: IT07 s CB 4  ¶5-217 Revenue account property Items disposed of that give rise to income in accordance with any of s CB 3 (Profit-making undertaking or scheme; see ¶5-192), CB 4 (Personal property acquired for purpose of disposal; see ¶5-197) or CB 5 (Business of dealing in personal property; see ¶5-211) will constitute revenue account property. Briefly, revenue account property is a person’s trading stock or property that would produce income for the person if the property was disposed of. Events that are treated as a disposal for depreciation purposes are specifically excluded from the definition of revenue account property. Section DB 23 provides for a specific deduction for the cost of revenue account property. See further at ¶10-660. Law: IT07 ss CB 3–CB 5  ¶5-219 Cryptoassets Cryptoassets are virtual assets that are a digital representation of value. They function as a medium of exchange and operate independently of banks and other financial institutions. Cryptoassets are created and stored digitally and rely on blockchain technology. The idea behind blockchain technology is peer-to-peer transacting and cutting out the “middle man”. They are released into circulation through the mining process. This involves verification of transactions, a task that is normally undertaken by banks. Miners verify the transactions using special software and hardware and are rewarded with cryptoassets for their work. Cryptoassets may also be known as cryptocurrencies, cryptographic assets, digital financial assets, digital tokens or virtual currencies.  The rising popularity of cryptoassets may see taxpayers involved in it in a number of ways, including: ▪ receiving it as payment for the supply of goods and services ▪ using it to pay for goods and services to businesses willing to accept it as payment ▪ buying and selling Bitcoin (trading) ▪ acquiring Bitcoin (for example, from mining or from a cryptocurrency exchange) and holding on to it as a long-term investment. Some different types of cryptoassets include: Payment tokens – these are a means of payment of exchange, for example, Bitcoin. Security tokens – represent existing property or financial assets and mirror securities, such as shares or debt. Utility tokens – are similar to traditional vouchers and used for direct access to goods or services. From a legal perspective, cryptoassets are not legal tender (in other words, it is not like notes and coins that must be accepted as payment for goods and services). For New Zealand tax purposes, cryptoassets are treated as property. This broadly follows the tax treatment in overseas jurisdictions such as Australia and the United States. The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) considers Bitcoin to be an asset (see guidance paper “Tax treatment of crypto-currencies — specifically Bitcoin” available on the ATO website). In the United Kingdom, cryptoassets are viewed as tradeable property (see CCH, New Zealand E-Commerce Bulletin, “UK Legal Statement on the Status of Cryptoassets and Smart Contracts”, Bulletin 2, December 2019). Inland Revenue (IR) has provided guidance on the tax treatment of cryptoassets on its website. Some of the tax issues to consider are set out below.  Receiving cryptoassets as payment for goods and services A business is required to pay tax on the New Zealand dollar value equivalent of cryptoassets that are accepted as payment for goods and services. IR considers this to be a barter transaction. The value of the cryptoassets should be converted into New Zealand dollars on the date that it is received as payment. Buying and selling cryptoassets for the purpose of disposal Income tax must be paid on cryptoassets that are acquired for the purpose of disposal (s CB 4). Therefore, dealers who purchase cryptoassets with the view of selling or disposing of them at a later date will be taxable on the sale proceeds. The person’s purpose must be determined at the time the cryptoasset is acquired and the purpose of disposal must be the dominant purpose. IR notes that a person’s purpose in acquiring cryptoassets must be supported by the person’s actions and the surrounding circumstances, such as: ▪ the circumstances surrounding the acquisition of the cryptoasset and its disposal ▪ the nature of the cryptoasset (whether it provides an income stream or any other benefits while held), and ▪ the number of similar transactions and length of time the cryptoasset is held. From the examples provided by IR on its website, it appears that the circumstances in which the disposal of cryptoassets will not give rise to taxable income are limited. IR notes that the fact that there is an income stream associated with a cryptoasset does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that the cryptoasset was not acquired for the purpose of disposal. Clear and compelling evidence will be required from a taxpayer to support the claim that the cryptoasset in question was not acquired for the  purpose of disposal. The issues are similar to those in respect of gold bullion. Further guidance can be found in QB 17/08, “Income tax — are proceeds from the sale of gold bullion income?” (see ¶5200). Dealing in cryptoassets Individuals and entities that are in the business of dealing (or trading) in cryptoassets must account for income tax on their trading profits (s CB 5). The trading stock rules may apply to these cryptoassets. Profit-making scheme or undertaking Another possibility is that cryptoassets may be part of a profit-making scheme or undertaking carried on by a person for the purpose of making a profit (s CB 3). If such a scheme is involved, an income tax liability may arise. Mining cryptoassets IR considers that in most scenarios mining is directed towards making a profit and will be a business activity rather than a hobby. Therefore, any mining receipts (ie mining related fees or rewards) may be taxable. In limited circumstances, a person’s mining activity may amount to merely a hobby. Remuneration paid in cryptocurrency In June 2018, IR released an Issues Paper, IRRUIP 11, “Whether remuneration paid to an employee in cryptocurrency is subject to PAYE or FBT”. IR’s initial view was that, where an employee was paid part of their regular remuneration in cryptocurrency, this would be subject to PAYE. As such the FBT rules would not apply. In June 2019, IR released two public rulings on payments made in cryptocurrency. The first ruling, BR Pub 19/01, “Income tax — salary and wages paid in crypto-assets”, confirmed this initial view. The crypto-asset payments are “PAYE income payments” and subject to the PAYE rules.  The second ruling, BR Pub 19/02, “Income tax — bonuses paid in crypto-assets”, considered the payment of an amount of cryptocurrency to an employee as an incentive or bonus and concluded that such “bonus” payments come within the meaning of “salary or wages” and are therefore also “PAYE income payments” and subject to the PAYE rules. Note that with effect from 1 March 2021, Inland Revenue withdrew and replaced these two rulings with two further rulings, BR Pub 21/01 and BR Pub 21/02. The income tax treatment in the rulings remained the same. However, the Commissioner was aware that some aspects of the arrangements ruled on and the commentary might be inconsistent with the Wages Protection Act 1983 and the Minimum Wage Act 1983, and this was addressed in the revised rulings. The Commissioner continues to be bound by the original rulings for arrangements entered into before their withdrawal. For a discussion of these rulings, see ¶3-198. In July 2019, IR released a third ruling, BR Pub 19/03, “Income tax – employer-issued crypto-assets provided to an employee”. It considers how fringe benefit tax applies where cryptocurrency issued by an employer is provided to an employee. For a discussion of this ruling, see ¶21-436. A fourth ruling was released in August 2019. BR Pub 19/04, “Income tax – application of the employee share scheme rules to employer issued crypto-assets provided to an employee”, considers the income tax treatment of employer-issued crypto-assets provided to employees, where the crypto-asset issued is a share in the employer (ie provides an interest in the capital of the company), the employee is not required to pay market value for the crypto-asset and the crypto-asset is not provided under an exempt ESS. See further at ¶3-470. ▸ Note: Issues paper – tax treatment of cryptoassets received from blockchain forks and airdrops In December 2020, IR released an issues paper on whether the receipt and subsequent disposal of cryptoassets received from a  blockchain hard fork or an airdrop are taxable: IRRUIP14, “Income tax – tax treatment of cryptoassets received from blockchain forks and airdrops”. Terminology used in the draft issues paper includes: Blockchain: A blockchain is a type of distributed ledger technology, providing a digital record of transactions that is shared and maintained by users across the network. Hard fork: A hard fork (sometimes also referred to as a “chain split”) changes the protocol code to create a new version of the blockchain alongside the old version, thus creating a new token that operates under the rules of the amended protocol while the original token continues to operate under the existing protocol. Airdrops: Airdrops are distributions of cryptoassets for no payment and are generally undertaken with a view to increasing awareness of a new token (particularly amongst “influencers”) and to increase liquidity in the early stages of a new token project. In summary, the draft issues paper provides the following: Possible income tax consequences No special tax rules apply to cryptoassets, so general principles apply. In many cases, the receipt of new cryptoassets from a hard fork or airdrop will not be income to the recipient. Instances where the receipt of new cryptoassets may be income include where the recipient: ▪ has a cryptoasset business (such as a dealing or mining business) ▪ is involved in a profit-making undertaking or scheme involving acquisitions of airdropped or forked cryptoassets ▪ has received airdropped cryptoassets as payment for services provided, or ▪ receives airdropped cryptoassets on a regular basis such that the receipts have the hallmarks of income.  Whether amounts received from disposing of these cryptoassets are taxable depends on the person’s circumstances: ▪ Cryptoassets that are received from a hard fork or airdrop by a cryptoasset business (such as a cryptoasset dealing or mining business) are likely be trading stock of the business and subject to the trading stock rules. Disposals of trading stock are taxable as business income. ▪ It is possible that s CB 3 (carrying on a profit-making undertaking or scheme) may apply if the person has a relevant profit-making undertaking or scheme. ▪ For disposals of cryptoassets that were received as a result of a hard fork, competing analyses can apply to determine the correct tax treatment. The more compelling argument is that the person’s purpose for acquiring the new cryptoassets takes on the same purpose as the original cryptoassets (similar to the tax treatment of a share subdivision and the treatment of shares under some demergers). Therefore, s CB 4 would apply to a disposal if it would apply to a disposal of the original cryptoassets. Additionally, a fork could be said to be a normal and anticipated consequence of holding cryptoassets. ▪ For disposals of airdropped cryptoassets, in cases where the person had done something to become entitled to receive or take possession of the airdropped cryptoassets (for example, the person may have signed up online to receive an airdrop), s CB 4 could apply to disposals of these cryptoassets if the person acquired them for the purpose of disposal. Conversely, if no positive action was taken by the recipient, then arguably the acquisition is passive and s CB 4 may not apply to the disposal. Cost of acquisition of cryptoassets No deductions are generally available for the cost of the cryptoassets received from a hard fork or an airdrop because the person has not incurred any expenditure in acquiring them. However,  transaction fees incurred may be included as part of the cost of acquiring such cryptoassets. In cases where a person is taxed on the receipt of cryptoassets and again on disposal, a cost should be attributed to the cryptoassets at the time of their disposal. The attributed cost of the cryptoassets should be equal to the value of the cryptoassets at the time of their receipt (in respect of which tax has already been paid).  ¶5-222 Income from sale of patent rights or patent applications An amount derived from the sale of patent rights or the sale of a patent application with a complete specification is income. Special rules apply if the patent rights or patent applications are transferred under a relationship agreement. See s FB 8. For the rules on deducting expenditure incurred in relation to a patent, see ¶10-750. The income derived from the sale of patent applications and patent rights is able to be spread evenly over the income year of sale and the following two years. This rule is intended to alleviate cashflow difficulties for vendors who sell patent rights for non-cash consideration. See s EI 4. Law: IT07 ss CB 30, EI 4, FB 8  ¶5-225 Income from unclaimed money Many businesses hold money that is owing to another person. In New Zealand, the Unclaimed Money Act 1971 sets out rules that apply to holders of unclaimed money. Generally, after a certain period, unclaimed money becomes payable to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. However, the amount ceases to be unclaimed money (although the owner of the money may still be entitled to repayment) where the amount of unclaimed money:  ▪ does not exceed $100 per owner (the person entitled to the money), and ▪ is applied by the holder for their own benefit (or for the benefit of any other person or for any purpose or object) within prescribed time frames (6 years or 25 years). If the holder does not apply the amount for its own benefit, that amount will continue to be unclaimed money and will be payable to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue after 6 years or 25 years. The Commissioner has issued rulings, BR Pub 17/01 and BR Pub 17/02, which provide guidance on when amounts of unclaimed money of less than $100, received in the course of business, are derived as income. The rulings conclude that while money is held on trust and cannot be (and has not been) applied by the holder for their own (or anyone else’s) benefit, it cannot be income of the holder. However, an unclaimed amount not held on trust will be derived when: ▪ it has been applied by the holder for its own (or anyone else’s) benefit, and ▪ it is probable the amount will not have to be repaid (including situations where the amount is not legally recoverable). Whether it is probable that an amount will not be repaid will depend on the particular business. Business records and accounting treatment are likely to be relevant to determining this. If a holder has recognised a previously unclaimed amount as income and subsequently returns that amount to the owner, the holder will be entitled to a deduction under s DA 1(b). The rulings apply indefinitely from the beginning of the 2017–18 income year and are published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 2, March 2017 at 2. ▸Note: In January 2020, Inland Revenue released a tax policy consultation document, “Unclaimed money”, which set out proposals  to more efficiently administer unclaimed money. Following consultation, proposed changes to substantially update the administration of the Unclaimed Money Act were included in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill by way of Supplementary Order Paper No 510, introduced into Parliament on 10 June 2020. The proposed amendments include: ▪ reducing the period of time that is required to pass before money is deemed unclaimed to 5 years (currently, this is either 6 or 25 years, depending on the nature of the account) ▪ widening the definition of unclaimed money to include depositlike investments in portfolio investment entities ▪ expanding the activity that prevents an amount of money from being unclaimed to include online activity ▪ allowing money to be transferred to IR before the expiry of the qualifying period to be unclaimed money if the Commissioner agrees ▪ clarifying the Act does not apply to unclaimed money covered by the Public Finance Act 1989 ▪ removing the requirement for unclaimed money holders to: □ hold unclaimed money and associated information for an extended period after the funds become unclaimed money, provided that the holder had already made reasonable efforts to contact the owner – if the holder had not sought to contact the owner, the holder would have three months to contact the owner and return the money before being required to transfer the funds to IR □ keep a register of unclaimed money at their head offices  □ provide occupation information for owners of unclaimed money, and □ make detailed information about unclaimed money publicly available on their register ▪ maintaining the current threshold for unclaimed money of $100, while allowing holders to transfer lesser amounts if the Commissioner agrees ▪ imposing a 60-year time bar for claiming unclaimed money ▪ defining the Unclaimed Money Act 1971 as an Inland Revenue Act, which will allow IR to use its own information in order to reduce administration costs (although note that the Act will not be brought within the disputes, penalties or interest provisions of the Tax Administration Act 1994) ▪ requiring holders of unclaimed money to provide information and funds to IR in a standard electronic format, and ▪ giving holders a two-year transitional period to implement the proposed changes. The proposed changes are intended to apply from the date of enactment of the Bill. Law: IT07 s CB 1  ¶5-227 Income from stolen money and property An amount equal to the market value of property obtained without claim of right is income of a person in the income year in which the person obtains possession or control of the property. Generally, “claim of right”, in relation to any act, means a belief that the act is lawful, although that belief may be based on ignorance or mistake of fact or of any matter of law other than the enactment against which the offence is alleged to have been committed. See s YA 1.  A deduction is allowed for restitution made to legal owners. See ¶10870. Law: IT07 ss CB 32, YA 1  ¶5-228 Income from disposal of emissions units Disposal of emissions units by sale When a person disposes of an emissions unit the amount derived is assessable income of that person. An emissions unit is defined in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007 to mean a unit as defined in s 4(1) of the Climate Change Response Act 2002, ie a New Zealand unit or an approved overseas unit (or, before 23 June 2020, a Kyoto unit). The tax treatment of transactions involving emissions units varies depending on the type of emissions unit. There are four types: ▪ non-forestry ▪ post-1989 forestry ▪ pre-1990 forestry where land is held on capital account (and so falls outside the tax system), and ▪ pre-1990 forestry where land is held on revenue account. As can be seen from above, distinction is made between post-1989 forest land and pre-1990 forest land (as defined in s 4(1) of the Climate Change Response Act) when dealing with emissions units relating to forestry land. Non-forestry Non-forestry emissions units are generally dealt with on an accruals basis. The underlying objective of the legislation is to treat these transactions as revenue account transactions. Post-1989 forest land As units relating to post-1989 forest land are held on revenue account, the broad approach under the rules is that the acquisition  costs of emissions units are deductible and any gains on their disposal are assessable. However, the position is complicated by the application of the cash basis of income recognition and specific timing and matching rules in the legislation. Pre-1990 forest land Transactions in relation to pre-1990 forest land are generally on capital account (unless the taxpayer holds the particular land on revenue account, for example where the person is a land dealer or developer, in which case special rules apply). A number of amendments were retrospectively introduced to deal with the securitisation of pre-1990 forest land emissions units through a sale and compulsory buy back transaction. This transaction is effectively a lease of the units in exchange for a loan. The transaction is treated as a financial arrangement with an attached excepted financial arrangement. The excepted financial arrangement is the assignment of the pre-1990 forest land emissions units by the holder to a person who is not an associated person (the lender) and the later assignment of the same or other New Zealand emissions units by the lender to the holder. The financial arrangements rules apply to the “interest” component only. For example, the “interest” paid by the original unitholder will be the difference between the amounts they receive from assigning the units and the total amounts they pay the lender under the arrangement. Under s DB 17B, the lender is denied a deduction for the amount they have lent to the original holder of the units. As the same amount of units is being returned, changes in the value of the emissions units are ignored. Under s CX 54B, the amount that relates to the market value of such an emissions unit under a transfer of the excepted financial arrangement is excluded income. In addition, the original unit and the returned unit are treated as having a value for the unit holder equal to the cost of the original unit for the unit holder under s EW 52B(4).  Any gain or loss made by the lender from subsequently selling the units to a third party and later purchasing replacement units is taxable. The lender is taxed on all proceeds from the sale of the units to a third party. Their cost base for the units sold is zero. However, the lender is able to deduct the cost of the replacement units acquired to meet their obligation to return units to the original holder. Provided the requirements of the arrangement are fulfilled, the original owner is considered to hold the units throughout the arrangement. This non-recognition of a disposal by the original owner means the one-off tax free status of the units on disposal is preserved. Where the units are not returned on the date agreed, the arrangement is effectively unwound for tax purposes and the original disposal of the units is treated as an ordinary disposal on the date the arrangement began. Surrender of units under the Climate Change Response Act 2002 If the emissions unit is surrendered to meet an obligation relating to post-1989 forestry land or pre-1990 forestry land held on revenue account, the unit is treated as being sold for zero. If the emissions unit is transferred to the Crown under a forest sink covenant, the unit is treated as being sold for zero. See s CB 36(4B). If the emissions unit is a post-1989 forest land emissions unit or a forest sink emissions unit but is surrendered to meet a liability that does not relate to post-1989 forest land or a transfer to the Crown under a permanent forestry scheme, it is treated as being sold for market value. The surrender of a non-forest land unit is treated as being sold at market value if the unit was transferred under the Government allocated emissions unit scheme (Pt 4, subpart 2 of the Climate Change Response Act, also known as a “free unit”) at a price of zero and the person surrenders the unit when it is valued at zero. See s CB 36(7).  In all other circumstances, surrender is treated as a sale for cost. This is because the business will have already received the deduction for the liability to surrender units on an accruals basis. See also ¶9-062. Conversion of units If a person converts a New Zealand emissions unit (other than a forest land emission unit) into something else under the Climate Change Response Act 2002 (before 23 June 2020, a Kyoto unit), then the person is treated as having sold the converted unit for: ▪ the unit’s value under s ED 1(7B) (see ¶9-062), if applicable, or ▪ the unit’s cost. Note that amounts derived on the disposal of pre-1990 forest land emissions units, other than by surrender, are excluded income. See s CX 51B. The rationale behind this provision is that the award of these types of emissions units is to compensate for the fall in the value of the land — this being a capital transaction it gives rise to excluded income. The definition of “pre-1990 forest land emissions unit” in s YA 1 ensures that transactions in emissions units that are transferred through certain entities as part of Treaty of Waitangi settlements still give rise to exempt income. Allocation of free units The allocation of free units is treated as income that is recognised on an accruals basis. See ¶9-062. Law: IT07 ss CB 36, CX 51B, CX 54B, DB 17B, EW 52B, YA 1  ¶5-230 Other income under subpart CB The following amounts are also income from business or trade-like activities:  ▪ certain amounts from the disposal of land — see ss CB 6A to CB 23B and Chapter 7 ▪ amounts from the sale of timber — see ss CB 24, CB 25 and ¶28-014 ▪ amounts from the disposal of certain shares by portfolio investment entities — see s CB 26 and ¶29-130 ▪ income equalisation scheme income — see s CB 27 and ¶27075, ¶27-085 and ¶27-120 ▪ refunds and transfers from an environmental restoration account — see s CB 28 and ¶10-412 ▪ amounts from the disposal of minerals — see s CB 29 ▪ income from a look-through company — see ss CB 32B, CB 32C and ¶19-155 ▪ amounts derived by mutual associations and their members — see ss CB 33, CB 34 and ¶24-090 ▪ income for partners from partnership — see s CB 35 and ¶23040.  Income from holding property (excluding equity) ¶5-232 Revenue derived from land The income of any landowner includes rent, a fine, a premium or other revenues (including any payment for the goodwill of a business or the benefit of a statutory licence or privilege: see ¶5-237) when that income is derived from any lease, licence or easement affecting the land or from the grant of a right to take the profits of the land. Section CC 1 should be read together with s EI 7, which provides for  the spreading of some of the income over the income year in which it is derived and the five subsequent income years. See ¶5-115. Rent On general principles, rental income is assessable income in the year in which it is received. There is no basis upon which the matching principle (ie the principle that recognition of income is matched with the deduction of expenditure — see ¶5-075) suggests adoption of the earnings method. See ¶5-078. This is unless the taxpayer is in the business of leasing. In this case, the rental income will be assessable income in the year in which it is derived. As a general proposition, the holding of property for the derivation of rental income does not amount to the carrying on of a business. Nonetheless, it is possible, particularly with a company, that the derivation of rental income amounts to the carrying on of a business. See LD Nathan Group Properties Ltd v C of IR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,602. Deduction of the expenses incurred in the earning of that rental income is permitted even though the rental activities do not amount to the carrying on of a business. However, in some cases, if the Commissioner believes that the rental activities are not carried on with a wholly income-producing purpose, the deductions claimed may be limited. Holiday houses In response to a question about the correct income tax treatment when an individual owns a holiday house and rents it out from time to time, Inland Revenue issued a “Questions we’ve been asked” item, QB 09/02, “Holiday houses — income tax treatment”, published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 3, May 2009 at 31. It noted that any rental income received was taxable under s CC 1 and should be returned in the owner’s tax return for the income year in which it was derived. As discussed above, this provision taxes any rental income derived from the leasing or licensing of land (and land includes any house on that land), regardless of whether the activity amounts to a business or whether market rates are charged. The item also provided general guidance on the deductibility of expenses incurred in owning the holiday house.  However, with effect from the 2013–14 income year, mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG apply to apportion expenditure when a holiday home is used for both private and income-earning use and also left vacant for at least 62 days in the year (see ¶10-035). As a result, QB 09/02 should no longer be relied upon. While rental income generally remains taxable under s CC 1, the deductibility of expenditure incurred in owning the holiday house is now subject to apportionment under subpart DG. In addition, under s DG 21, if the amount of rental income derived for an income year is less than $4,000, the owner may choose to treat the income as exempt income under s CW 8B(2) and effectively opt out of the apportionment rules. Any expenditure incurred in relation to the holiday home will then be non-deductible. The decision to opt out is made in each year and can change from year to year. Companies holding holiday homes cannot use the opt-out provisions. Airbnb Renting out a property through websites such as Airbnb has become increasingly common in New Zealand. Airbnb hosts may rent out an entire house or apartment or simply a part of their property (such as a single room or sleep out). As for other holiday home arrangements, a number of different tax scenarios can arise depending on the nature of the property, whether it is vacant for parts of the year and the ownership structure of the property. Generally speaking, any income received for letting out a property or a room through Airbnb is subject to income tax. This is similar to renting out a residential rental property. As above, the mixed-use asset rules will apply if the property is used for both private and income-earning purposes and is also vacant for at least 62 days in the year, or the host can choose to treat the income as exempt income if the rental income is less than $4,000 and expenditure will then be non-deductible. The mixed-use asset rules will generally not apply if the property available for rent is a room or rooms within the host’s home in which they live, as a person’s home is not usually vacant for 62 days in an income year. If the mixed-use asset rules are not applicable, then  expenditure has to be apportioned on a fair and reasonable basis. There are no set rules, and the apportionment method has to be determined on a case-by-case basis. The following general rules apply: ▪ Expenses that relate solely to the Airbnb activity should generally be fully deductible (for example, fees for advertising). ▪ Expenses that relate to both income earning and private use have to be apportioned, typically based on the floor area of the property. ▪ Factors such as the rate of occupancy also impact the apportionment calculation. Inland Revenue statements In May 2019, Inland Revenue released a number of items on the provision of short-stay accommodation by taxpayers, either in their own property or in a separate property, including: ▪ “Overview — Short-stay accommodation items” ▪ QB 19/05, “What are my income tax obligations if I rent out my home or a separate dwelling on my property as short-stay accommodation?” ▪ QB 19/06, “What income tax rules apply if I have a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use myself?” ▪ QB 19/07, “How do the mixed-use asset income tax rules apply to a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use privately?” ▪ QB 19/08, “How do the standard income tax rules apply to a dwelling that I sometimes rent out as short-stay accommodation and sometimes use privately?”  ▪ QB 19/09, “Can I register for GST if I supply short-stay accommodation to guests in my home or holiday home?” ▪ Determination DET 19/02, “Standard-cost household service for short-stay accommodation providers”. The items look at a variety of scenarios in which short-stay accommodation is provided, including properties advertised on Airbnb and Bookabach. The items confirm that amounts received for rental will be income. However, if the standard-costs approach in Determination DET 19/02 (see ¶5-695) is adopted, the income will be exempt to the extent of the standard costs and only the excess income, if any, will need to be declared. If the person is unable, or chooses not, to use the standard costs approach, then all the income will be taxable and deductions will be based on the actual costs related to earning the income. Apportionment of some of these expenses will be necessary, as they will also relate to the private use of the home. If a separate dwelling on the same property as the person’s home is rented out for short-stay accommodation, different tax rules will apply depending on the situation. If the separate dwelling is only rented out and never used privately, all of its rental income will be taxable and all of the deductible expenses in relation to the dwelling may be claimed. If, in addition to sometimes renting out the dwelling, it is also sometimes used privately, the dwelling may be subject to either the “mixed-use asset” rules or the standard income tax rules. The various items set out how to determine which rules apply to different situations and how to apply those rules in each situation. They are discussed in more detail at ¶5-695, ¶10-113 and ¶32-052. In December 2019, Inland Revenue released two further items in the series: ▪ QB 19/15, “If property held in a trust is rented out by a beneficiary of the trust for short-stay accommodation, who should declare the income, and what deductions can be  claimed?” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 59) ▪ QB 19/16, “If property held in a trust is rented out by the trustees for short-stay accommodation, who should declare the income, and what deductions can be claimed?” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 65). QB 19/15, relating to property held in trust and rented out by a beneficiary (eg the property is the beneficiary’s home), confirms the rental will be income and the income will belong to the beneficiary. Some may be exempt if the standard-costs approach is adopted or the mixed-use asset rules apply, as discussed above. Note that QB 19/15 does state that in this situation, although most of the property-related expenditure will be incurred by the beneficiary who lives there, some expenditure will be incurred by the trustees, eg the rates and possibly property insurance. Often the beneficiary who lives in the property will pay these property-related outgoings incurred by the trust as part of the arrangement that allows them to live in the property. The payment of those amounts by the beneficiary would be rental income to the trustees under s CC 1. However, this rental income would be offset by the trustees being able to deduct the expenditure, as it is incurred by them in deriving the rental income. Note that non-active trusts may not need to file a tax return, but other trusts will have to file a tax return showing the income and deductions. QB 19/15 also considers whether s GC 5 could apply to deem “adequate rent” be paid by the beneficiary to the trust. The QWBA states that the Commissioner will not use s GC 5 to deem there to be “adequate rent” paid for a lease in a situation where the lease is not creating an opportunity for a tax benefit through the shifting of income from one person to another. QB 19/16, relating to property held in trust and rented out by the trustees, also confirms that the rental will be income, but it will belong to the trustees and generally have to be declared in the trust’s tax return. However, if some or all of the income is allocated  as beneficiary income, it will be taxed at the beneficiary’s tax rate, rather than the trust rate. In both QB 19/15 and QB 19/16, non-capital costs related to earning the income will be able to be deducted, but some costs will only be partly deductible if they also relate to the private use (eg in the case of the beneficiary) or non-income earning use of the property. QB 19/15 and QB 19/16 both apply the earlier items in the series to determine which rules apply, what income is exempt and to what extent any expenditure is deductible. See ¶10-113. The final item in the series on short-stay accommodation, released in June 2020, is interpretation statement IS 20/04, “Goods and services tax: GST treatment of short-stay accommodation” (see ¶32-052). Boarders For the tax treatment of board payments received from a boarder, see ¶5-695. Other revenues In Vector Ltd v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-096, the High Court held that “other revenues” in s CC 1(2)(g) is not intended to tax amounts of a capital nature. It captures amounts that are income, but are not covered by s CC 1(2)(a) to (f). Whether s CC 1 applied in the case before the court was therefore answered by determining whether the amounts at issue were of a capital nature or income. Briefly, the facts were that Vector, an electricity distribution company, owned two electricity distribution networks in the greater Auckland region. Transpower, who managed and operated the national electricity transmission grid in New Zealand, entered into an agreement with Vector to use Vector’s infrastructure to carry out upgrades. The agreement provided for Transpower to pay Vector for the Northern Easements and for the Southern Access Rights. The court held that the amounts were capital and s CC 1 did not apply in this case. Through the agreement, Vector’s ability to use its asset was effectively permanently impaired. The payments were of a once and for all nature producing advantages to Transpower that were  enduring. This factor clearly pointed towards the amounts being capital in nature. On appeal, the Court of Appeal upheld the High Court decision, confirming the lower court was correct in finding that the term “other revenues” did not include amounts of a capital nature. The Court of Appeal also rejected the Commissioner’s alternative submission that in reality the consideration was disguised rent paid in advance as a lump sum. The Court confirmed there was effectively a permanent disposition of Vector’s property interests. C of IR v Vector Ltd (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-065. Foreign rental property The following three items were jointly prepared and released by Inland Revenue in July 2020 to address a range of tax issues a New Zealand tax resident individual may face if they own foreign residential rental property: ▪ IS 20/06, “Income tax – Tax issues arising from ownership of foreign residential rental property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 98) ▪ IS 20/07, “Income tax – Application of the financial arrangements rules to foreign currency loans used to finance foreign residential rental property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 110), and ▪ FX 20/01, “Approval – foreign residential rental property amounts – currency conversion” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 28). The first item is an interpretation statement that provides high level summaries of the various tax issues that can arise for New Zealand tax resident individuals who own foreign residential rental property. The topics briefly covered in the statement include: ▪ tax residency ▪ recognition of income or expenditure  ▪ balance date differences ▪ foreign exchange rates and conversion timing ▪ the types of income that may arise (ie overseas rental income, income from the sale of the property, and financial arrangement income arising from foreign exchange gains) ▪ expenses (such as repairs and maintenance, depreciation and interest deductions) ▪ entitlement to foreign tax credits (see ¶26-250), and ▪ other New Zealand tax obligations. A number of examples are also included in the statement. The second item is an interpretation statement that provides more detailed guidance on when and how the financial arrangements rules apply to foreign currency loans that New Zealand tax resident individuals use to finance a foreign residential rental property: see ¶6-213. The third item is an Approval that sets out a range of currency conversion methods that individuals with an interest in a foreign residential rental property can use to convert foreign currency amounts into NZ dollars: see ¶26-035. Law: IT07 ss CC 1, CW 8B(2), DG 21  ¶5-237 Tax treatment of goodwill Goodwill may be either personal, attaching to a business and dependent upon the personal relations between the proprietor and his or her customers, or local, attaching to the premises. Liability for income tax is largely dependent upon the category into which the goodwill payment falls. The documentation in relation to the goodwill will be important in this regard. In many instances, a payment of  goodwill must be apportioned between the two. See Case H66 (1986) 8 NZTC 473. Personal goodwill An amount attributable to personal goodwill, such as that relating to a solicitor’s or doctor’s practice, is generally regarded as being on capital account (ie non-taxable). Trade names, trademarks, logos and the like are generally tied up with this concept of personal goodwill. See FC of T v Just Jeans Pty Ltd 87 ATC 4373. Local and site goodwill Goodwill is income when received by an owner of land from a lease, licence or easement affecting that land (for example, the grant of a lease or sublease on the sale of a business). For a payment of goodwill to fall within this category, the payment must relate to the physical location of the business and not to personal factors, such as the business having been built up through reputation or service. See Romanos Motels Ltd v C of IR [1973] 1 NZLR 435 (CA) and Hawkless v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,646. Amounts received for the goodwill of the lease of licensed premises such as hotels or fast food outlets, are typical examples of goodwill included in assessable income. Goodwill on sale of a lease An owner of land is any person who owns an estate or interest in land, and so the definition includes a lessee. One implication is that any payment of goodwill received upon the grant of a sublease is assessable income of the lessee. Under s CC 1, the total amount received is income in the year of receipt unless the person applies to have the amount spread over the income year in which it was derived and the five succeeding income years under s EI 7, see ¶5115. For discussion on the deductibility of goodwill payments, see ¶10-502. However, if the lessee sells or assigns the lease outright, the sale proceeds are a capital receipt, unless the vendor is a person who is in the business of dealing in leases, or if the vendor acquired the lease with a view to selling or otherwise disposing of it. The  purchaser of the lease may be able to claim depreciation deductions in respect of any remaining goodwill as depreciable intangible property under the depreciation rules. However, no depreciation deduction may be available if the lease was transferred between associated persons. See ¶13-440. Law: IT07 ss CC 1  ¶5-242 Tax treatment of lease inducement payments Lump sum inducement payments, ie rent-free periods, free fit-outs, etc, paid to prospective tenants as an inducement to enter into a lease have generally been regarded as a capital receipt to the tenant. However, this approach was put in doubt by FC of T v Cooling 90 ATC 4472. In that case, the Full Federal Court of Australia held that a lease incentive cash payment to induce a firm of solicitors to move office was assessable income. Since a not insignificant purpose of the transaction was to obtain a commercial profit by way of the incentive payment, there was no reason why that profit should not be seen to be income according to ordinary concepts. A similar approach was adopted by the Full Federal Court in Rotherwood Pty Ltd v FC of T 96 ATC 4203. Wattie decision In Wattie v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,712, the first rent inducement case to be decided in New Zealand, the High Court held that a lump sum inducement payment received by an accounting firm for moving into new premises was assessable as income in the year of receipt. The High Court determined that the lump sum inducement was a form of rent subsidy and represented assessable income in the hands of the taxpayers. However, the Court of Appeal ((1997) 18 NZTC 13,297) rejected the High Court decision and held that the inducement sum was a capital item and was not taxable. It was not a form of rent subsidy. It was also not taxable as a profit or gain arising from the ordinary course of the firm’s business.  The Privy Council ((1998) 18 NZTC 13,991) rejected the Commissioner’s appeal from the Court of Appeal decision and confirmed that the inducement payment was capital in nature. The approach of the Privy Council followed the traditional approach adopted by the courts to classifying whether a receipt or expenditure is of a capital or revenue nature (see ¶5-031 and ¶10-075). The lump sum nature of the payments, the nature of the advantages obtained and the substantial periods involved more than adequately established the expenditure as made for the acquisition of capital assets. Furthermore, in the absence of any special legislation to the contrary, a premium has always been recognised as capital rather than revenue in both New Zealand and the United Kingdom. Legislative changes In 2013, legislation was introduced to make both commercial lease inducement payments and lease surrender payments assessable and deductible.  Section CC 1B applies to lease inducement payments derived on or after 1 April 2013, in relation to a lease or licence entered, renewed, extended or transferred on or after that date. When a person (the payee) derives an amount as consideration for the agreement by the payee to the grant, renewal, extension or transfer of a right (the land right) that is a leasehold estate or a licence to use land, that amount is income of the payee under s CC 1B. A timing rule in s EI 4B applies to spread the amount of income over the term of the lease. Exceptions Section CC 1B, as originally enacted, did not apply to an amount derived by the payee as the holder of a land right and as consideration for the transfer of the land right to the payer. Thus, a lease transfer payment received by an assignor from an assignee for the assignment of an existing lease was not taxable under s CC 1B from 1 April 2013 until 31 March 2014. However, with effect from 1 April 2015, s CC 1B was amended to exclude Glasgow-type leases, which are renewable in perpetuity, and also to extend the application of s CC 1B to include lease transfer payments. Although the charging provision is broad, most lease transfer payments will not be taxable by satisfying certain conditions. The intention is that only those transfer payments that are substitutable for taxable lease surrender payments in s CC 1C and taxable lease premiums in s CC 1 will be taxable. A lease transfer payment will not be taxable if the following conditions are satisfied: ▪ the payee is the holder of the land right (eg the exiting tenant) ▪ the amount is consideration for the transfer of the land right to the person paying the amount (eg the new tenant) ▪ the amount is not sourced from funds provided, by the owner of the estate in land from which the land right is granted, for purposes that include obtaining the surrender or termination of the land right, and ▪ each of the payee and the person making the payment is not associated with the owner of the estate in land from which the  land right is granted. Section CC 1B also contains an exception for a tenant or licensee of residential premises. The amount is not considered income if the payee is a natural person and derives the amount as a tenant or licensee of residential premises whose expenditure on the residential premises does not meet the requirements of the general permission. As an individual tenant or a licensee of residential premises is not allowed a deduction for payments of rent because they do not meet the general permission in s DA 1 and also the private limitation in s DA 2(2), this exception ensures a consistent tax treatment of income and deductions for such taxpayers. However, note that from 1 April 2015 the exception only applies where the payee is not associated with the owner of the estate in land from which the land right is granted. An amount derived as a capital contribution is also excluded. Following the Court of Appeal decision in C of IR v Vector Ltd (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-065 that the grant of a land right was not taxable under s CC 1 as “other revenue” (see ¶5-232), the exclusion for a one-off payment for the grant of a permanent easement in former s CC 1(2C) was made redundant and the provision was repealed and moved to s CC 1B to clarify the position. However, doubts had also been raised about whether s CC 1B captured payments for the grant of a land right (despite the court in Vector noting that the amount in that case would have been caught by the section if it had existed at the time of the transaction). As a result, and following announcements made by the Minister of Revenue that the position would be clarified, further amendments were made to ensure that payments for the grant of a land right (such as a licence or a limited term easement) are taxable. This also ensures the relocated exclusion for a one-off payment for the grant of a permanent easement has its intended effect. The amendments apply retrospectively from 1 April 2013, but a savings provision was included for those who had filed a tax return or been given a binding ruling on the previous basis before 23 August 2019 (the date of the announcement by the Minister).  Timing rule The timing rule in s EI 4B spreads the amount of the income under s CC 1B over the “spreading period”. The “spreading period” means a period that: ▪ begins with the commencement, or a renewal or extension, of the land right, and ▪ ends before the earliest following date on which the land right may be terminated, or may expire, if not extended or renewed. Thus, the spreading period is an initial fixed period determined at the grant, renewal or extension of the land right. If, later, there is a payment for a further renewal or extension of the land right, that payment would be spread over the new fixed renewal or extension period, as that period is regarded as a separate spreading period. (See examples at ¶10-670.) Where the income is derived before the end of the spreading period, the amount is allocated proportionately on a monthly basis over the remainder of the spreading period. As in most cases the lease inducement payment will be paid before the commencement of the spreading period, the amount will generally be spread over the entire spreading period. Note that even if the payment is made well before the spreading period commences, the amount is allocated in relation to the spreading period, and not when the amount is derived. Where the income is derived at or after the end of the spreading period, then the amount is allocated to the income year in which it is derived. If the spreading period is more than 50 years, the amount is allocated evenly over the first 50 income years. Ceasing to hold the land If a person ceases to hold the relevant land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted part way through the spreading period, an exception to the timing rules applies, allowing for a “washup” calculation. For income, if there is a remaining amount to be allocated under the main spreading provision in s EI 4B(3), the  amount of income is allocated to an income year (the balance year) ending before the end of the spreading period if: ▪ at the beginning of the balance year, the person holds the land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted ▪ in the balance year, the person ceases to hold the land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted, and ▪ the amount would be allocated under s EI 4B(3) to an income year ending before, or including the end of the spreading period, and after the balance year. The timing rule in s EI 4B does not apply to an amount that is income under s CC 1, which relates to income from land (see ¶5-232), or s CG 8, which relates to capital contributions (see ¶5-356). The following example shows how the timing provision would apply to a lease inducement payment paid as a contribution towards the cost of a fit-out. Example: On 1 April 2013, a tenant receives a lease inducement payment of $100,000 from its landlord to enter into a 12-year lease. The terms and conditions of the agreement require that the tenant must use the payment for a fit-out of their lease premises. The tenant spends a total of $300,000 on its fit-out in the 2013–14 income year. The tenant and the landlord both have a 31 March balance date. The tenant The tenant can either choose to return $100,000 as income over the next 10 years, starting from the 2013–14 income year (under s CG 8), or reduce the cost base of the fit-out by $100,000 (under s DB 64). Under the latter option, the tenant is only able to claim depreciation on the remaining $200,000 of expenditure incurred on the fit-out. The landlord The landlord is allowed a deduction of $100,000 under s DB 20B, which is allocated under s EI 4B over the 12-year period from the 2013–14 to the 2024–25 income years inclusive (ie a deduction of $8,333 is allocated to the landlord in each income year). Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 30.  A lease inducement payment is deductible under s DB 20B (see ¶10670). Law: IT07 ss CC 1B, EI 4B  ¶5-247 Tax treatment of lease surrender payments Section CC 1C provides that when a person (the payee) derives an amount as consideration for the agreement by the payee to the surrender or termination of a land right (a leasehold estate, but excluding Glasgow-type leases, which are renewable in perpetuity, or licence to use land), that amount is income of the payee. The payee must be: ▪ the person who owns the estate in land from which the land right is granted, or ▪ the person who owns the land right. The section ensures, therefore, that a landlord who receives a surrender payment from a tenant will be taxed on that payment as will a tenant who receives a payment to exit a lease. The section does not apply to a residential tenant who is a natural person and not entitled to deduct their expenditure on the residential premises. There is no specific timing provision for lease surrender payments and therefore the general provisions of the Income Tax Act apply to determine when an amount is derived under s CC 1C. A matching deduction provision is contained in s DB 20C (see ¶10670). Law: IT07 ss CC 1, CC 1C  ¶5-252 Mortgagee in possession must return income as mortgagor’s agent When a mortgagee exercises its rights to enter into possession of the land or other property that constitutes their security, pending a later sale, the mortgagee is deemed to be the agent of the mortgagor in  respect of any income derived by the mortgagee from the security on behalf of the mortgagor. As the mortgagor’s agent, the mortgagee must make a return of the income derived from the property and pay any tax owing. Law: IT07 s HD 10  ¶5-260 Income derived under a covenant of repair An amount derived by a lessor of land under a covenant of repair under a lease agreement is income of the lessor. The income is derived in the income year of receipt. Spreading of income The lessor may elect to allocate the income derived under a covenant of repair between the income year of receipt and any one or more of the following four income years. Any part of the receipt that is not allocated in the election is allocated to the fourth income year following the income year of receipt. To spread the income, the lessor must give notice of this to the Commissioner. The notice must specify how the income has been allocated. Further, the notice must be made within the time required to file a tax return for the income year to which the income is allocated, or within a longer time if the Commissioner agrees. An election to spread the income cannot be revoked. Lessor ceases to own the land A special timing rule applies if: ▪ the lessor has made an election to spread income derived under a covenant of repair to more than one income year, and ▪ the lessor ceases to own the land to which the income relates before the end of the third tax year following the tax year in which the income was received. In this case, if a part of the income has not been allocated, then that part is allocated to the income year in which ownership of the land  ceases. If the lessor ceases to own part of the land to which the income relates, the timing adjustment applies only to the income that relates to the part of the land that is no longer owned. The balance of the income derived is spread in accordance with the election. Law: IT07 ss CC 2, EI 5, EI 6  ¶5-263 Income from financial arrangements A person who is a party to a financial arrangement and who is treated as deriving income under the financial arrangements rules must include the amount derived as income. Briefly, income from all transactions defined as financial arrangements is treated on an accrual basis under subpart EW. Under s EW 2(1), the timing and quantifying of income and expenditure under a financial arrangement is determined in accordance with the financial arrangements rules, ie those rules take precedence over any other provision. Generally, the financial arrangements rules aim to bring the taxation of income from debt instruments into line with recognised financial accounting principles. This results in a closer matching of revenue received and costs incurred by the person. See ¶6-010. Law: IT07 ss CC 3(1), EW 2(1)  ¶5-268 Interest income and income from money lent All interest derived by a person is income. The financial arrangements rules may require income for tax purposes to be recognised on a yield to maturity basis. When this is not required (because the person is classified as a cash basis person under those rules), interest income is included in income as and when received. When the interest is payable on securities acquired during the income year, an apportionment may be made for the interest accrued up to the date of transfer but not paid between the transferor and the transferee.  Broadly, for a person’s income, “interest” means a payment made to the person for money lent to any person. It does not matter that the payment is periodical. Further, how the payment is described or computed is not relevant to the question of whether a payment is “interest”. Specifically excluded from the definition of “interest” for a person’s income are a redemption payment and a repayment of money lent (ie principal). Although the definition excludes a redemption payment from the concept of interest, any such payment is still income. See ¶5-282. Since the definition covers all returns to the lender, with the exception of loan capital repayments, not only interest as such but also any premium is income derived by the lender. Also see ¶5-272. For interest to be included in income, the return to the lender must be for money lent. This means that the definition of interest does not cover items that are incurred for any professional services performed in arranging or managing the loan transaction (ie legal fees, procuration fees, management fees or brokerage). The definition of “money lent” includes not only the usual borrowing transactions, such as the advancing or depositing of money and the giving of credit, but also in a case when money goes from a person to another person in consideration for that person’s promise to pay the lender a greater amount. A transaction where the promise to pay is made by a person other than the person receiving the amount is caught within the definition of “money lent” if the person making the promise and the person in receipt of the amount are associated. Example: A pays B $80 and receives a promise from C (B’s husband) to pay $100 in three months’ time. The money lent to B is $80.  Money goes from a person to another person when it is paid, distributed, or credited to, or dealt with in the other person’s interest or behalf. The loan transaction is not confined, in other words, to the situation in which the loan funds are paid to the borrower. Law: IT07 ss CC 4, YA 1  ¶5-272 Interest income — bonus balloting shares and bank prizes Under the definition, most forms of interest are income unless specifically exempted. Interest received from a bank, finance company, building society, solicitors’ mortgagee company or a company on a debenture note, for example, is included in assessable income. The Commissioner also assesses a sum received upon early repayment of a mortgage on the footing that it is a lump sum in lieu of future interest. Also treated as interest is the value of any ballot prize arising from building society bonus balloting shares. Should the prize winner take the prize in the form of a mortgage loan, the cash equivalent is taken as the amount to be included in the recipient’s income. If the prize is taken as cash, the income is allocated to the day on which the prize-winning bonus ballot is held. If the prize is taken as an advance, the income is allocated to the day on which the advance is made. If the advance is made in a series of advances, the income is allocated to the first day on which an advance is made. Where a building society holds a competition for depositors that is not related to bonus balloting shares within s CC 6, prizes received in relation to that competition are exempt from tax. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 2, No 7, March 1991 at 2. Interest income does not include the prize won by the holder of a bank (or similar) account. The prize relates to the competition and not the money lent. The right to participate in the competition, however, may be of some value and Inland Revenue might seek to assess the value of that right. Law: IT07 ss CC 4, CC 6  ¶5-274 Debenture interest income Income from a debenture is taxed according to the type of debenture held. Interest payable under a debenture is treated as a dividend if it relates to profit-related (floating rate) debentures. Otherwise, an  amount derived from a debenture is taxed in the hands of the recipient as interest under s CC 4. Law: IT07 ss CC 4, FA 2  ¶5-275 Income — annuities Payments of an annuity are income of the recipient. An annuity generally is regarded as an annual payment made for a limited period or for the life of the grantee. It is difficult to distinguish between annuities in the nature of income and instalments of capital. However, as a general proposition, annual payments made in liquidation of a principal sum do not constitute an annuity, while annual payments are regarded as an annuity when there is no fixed sum or debt to be liquidated. Example 1: A taxpayer paid six annual premiums in return for an annuity based on those premiums paid plus interest. It was held that the premiums were not an annuity but were a repayment of what had been paid out. See Perrin v Dickson (1929) 14 TC 608.  Example 2: Fixed cash payments made in consideration for the transfer of certain assets have been held to be income in the hands of the recipients. See IR Commrs v Church Commrs for England [1976] 2 All ER 1037.  An annuity that provides for the repayment of the purchase price (less any annuity already paid) is treated as a non-taxable capital receipt to the extent that it is a return of purchase money. In relation to an annuity certain, the Commissioner treats as taxable that portion that represents interest. An annuity certain is one that provides for a fixed number of payments irrespective of the death of the annuitant and the principal sum is always identified. Law: IT07 s CC 5  ¶5-279 Income — benefit from money advanced in lieu of interest The value of any benefit from money advanced will be income if all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ a lender provides money to a borrower for use in a business that the borrower carries on in New Zealand, and ▪ the borrower provides a tangible or intangible benefit to the lender that: □ is not interest, and □ may or may not be relief from an obligation, and □ may or may not be convertible into money, and ▪ the borrowing is a commercial transaction under which the borrower would have been liable to pay interest at the current commercial rate if the borrower had not provided the benefit. Whether interest would have been payable is to be determined having regard to the nature and term of the loan. Examples of the types of benefit that may be income include the discharge, forgiveness or satisfaction of any obligation, liability or debt. The amount of income assessable to the lender is the interest that the borrower would have been liable to pay if the money had been lent to the borrower at the current commercial rate of interest, reduced by any interest actually paid. What the rate of interest would be is determined with regard to the nature and term of the loan. Example: An interest-free loan made to a retirement village by a resident in return for reductions in tenancy charges would be subject to tax. The value assessable to the resident is a sum equal to the amount of interest receivable had that money been lent to the borrower at commercial rates of interest.  Law: IT07 s CC 7  ¶5-281 Use of money interest is income Use of money interest payable by the Commissioner to a person for overpaid tax is income of the person. Section EF 4(1) provides that UOMI payable by the Commissioner is allocated to the income year in which the Commissioner pays the interest. Under s CC 8(3) use of money interest is disregarded for the purposes of the financial arrangements rules. Law: IT07 ss CC 8, DB 3B, EF 4, EF 5  ¶5-282 Taxation of commercial bills A commercial bill is a financial arrangement; therefore, a person who is a party to it will be subject to tax on it in accordance with the financial arrangements rules. See ¶6-010. Briefly, a commercial bill includes: ▪ a document creating or securing a legal or equitable security over goods (as defined in s 16 of the Personal Property Securities Act 1999) for the payment of money owing or to become owing ▪ a bill of exchange (as defined in s 3 of the Bills of Exchange Act 1908) ▪ a promissory note (as defined in s 84 of the Bills of Exchange Act), but not a banknote ▪ a treasury bill ▪ a document or agreement having substantially the same purpose or effect as an item referred to above, and ▪ a share or interest in an item referred to above.  A commercial bill does not include a debenture or bond for the payment of a security issued by a body corporate. Also excluded is a security (whether legal or equitable) over an estate or interest in land. Non-resident holders A non-resident holder of a commercial bill derives income from the redemption or disposal of the bill when the non-resident must account for income and expenditure other than under the financial arrangements rules or the old financial arrangements rules. See s CC 8B. Law: IT07 ss CC 8B, YA 1  ¶5-283 Income — royalties Any payment of a royalty is income of the recipient. The term is broadly defined in s CC 9 of the Income Tax Act 2007. It includes not only what are normally regarded as royalty payments but also payments for the supply of knowhow. Considerations such as whether the payment is periodical and how the payment is described and computed do not have a bearing on the character of the payment. So long as the payment is for any of the property or rights described in s CC 9(2), the payment constitutes a royalty to be included in the recipient’s income. However, a distinction may be made between a payment for the right to use the property, or rights so described, and payment for the absolute assignment or sale of such rights. In the latter instance, payment for such rights is generally a capital receipt. See DB Group Ltd v C of IR, DGB Productions Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC 12,446 per Doogue J at 12,450. A difficult area is the distinction between payments for the supply of knowhow and payments for the supply of services. In the Commissioner’s view, knowhow is an asset such as a product that is already in existence or substantially so. The supply of special skill and knowledge, on the other hand, to bring a product into existence may be regarded as representing the supply of services. Another  practice followed by the Commissioner is to treat as a royalty the whole of any payment for the supply of knowhow and for services to be provided from time to time to enable the user to enjoy that knowhow. The Commissioner accepts that the services component does not give rise to a royalty when the services are clearly unconnected with the knowhow. Example: A New Zealand law firm undertook work for a number of overseas clients. Payment for the work was credited to the firm’s New Zealand bank account. The taxpayer claimed an export incentive for “qualifying services” (pursuant to the former provision in s 158 of the Income Tax Act 1976) on the basis that the payments were received for the supply of “knowhow”. The issue that had to be decided was whether the payments made by the overseas clients were for the supply of knowhow or for a service. The court held that technical knowledge and information encompassed the supply of professional legal services. Consequently, because the services were provided by the taxpayer to a non-resident outside New Zealand, the work was performed in New Zealand and payment was in New Zealand currency, the legal services provided by the taxpayer were eligible for the export incentive. See Ricketts v C of IR (1988) 10 NZTC 5,001.  Law: IT07 s CC 9  ¶5-285 Other income under subpart CC The following amounts are also income from holding property (excluding equity): ▪ receipts from the exploitation of a film, or the rights to a film — see s CC 10 ▪ certain amounts from the disposal of a finance lease asset — see ss CC 11, CC 12 and ¶6-700 ▪ certain amounts paid after a hire purchase agreement ends — see s CC 13 and ¶6-740.  Income from equity  ¶5-286 Income — dividends As a general proposition, any dividend is income of the recipient of that dividend. See s CD 1. Sections CD 3–CD 20 set out what distributions will constitute dividends for tax purposes. Sections CD 22–CD 37 set out what is not a dividend. Sections CD 38–CD 44 provide the calculation rules. Section CD 53 deals with the prevention of double taxation. For a discussion of the dividend provisions, including the treatment of inter-corporate dividends, see ¶16-550 et seq. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to clarify that a dividend, other than a non-cash dividend, is allocated to the income year in which the person receives the dividend. The amendment is intended to apply from 1 April 2020 for the 2020–21 and later income years. Investment society dividends Dividends paid by certain building societies and credit unions are income. See s CD 1 and the definition of “investment society dividend” in s YA 1. Law: IT07 ss CD 1, YA 1  ¶5-288 Income under share-lending arrangements Any replacement payments derived under a share-lending arrangement are income under s CD 54. Any share-lending collateral derived under a share-lending arrangement is excluded income under s CX 54. Specific share-lending rules were introduced to allow “qualifying” share-lending transactions to be taxed on the basis of economic substance (a loan) rather than legal form (a sale of shares). Returning share transfers that meet certain criteria (being sharelending arrangements) are taxed as if they were loans and not disposals of shares. Returning share transfers that do not qualify as share-lending arrangements are taxed as disposals of shares.  For a discussion of what constitutes a qualifying share-lending transaction and a returning share transfer, see ¶17-116. For deductions, see ¶10-660. Although share-lending arrangements are treated as if they were loans for tax purposes, they are excepted financial arrangements. See ¶6-065. Share-lending arrangements also fall outside the rules contained in s GC 1 (Sale or other disposition of trading stock for inadequate consideration) and subpart ED (Valuation of excepted financial arrangements). See ¶33-146, ¶9-060 and ¶9-065. When a replacement payment is made under a share-lending arrangement, the share user must provide the share supplier with a replacement payment statement in accordance with s 30B of the Tax Administration Act 1994. An anti-avoidance provision ensures that taxpayers do not attempt to structure transactions that fall outside the returning share transfer definition. See s GB 49. For further discussion and examples of the operation of the sharelending rules, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 86. Law: IT07 ss CD 54, CX 54, GB 49, YA 1; TAA s 30B  Employee or contractor income ¶5-290 Employment income Certain amounts derived by a person in connection with the person’s employment or service are income of the person. The amounts are: ▪ salary or wages or an allowance, bonus, extra pay, or gratuity ▪ expenditure on account of an employee that is expenditure on account of the person ▪ the value of accommodation referred to in ss CE 1B to CE 1E — see ¶3-420  ▪ a benefit received under an employee share scheme — see ¶3470 ▪ directors’ fees ▪ compensation for loss of employment or service, and ▪ any other benefit in money. The definition of “salary or wages” is discussed in ¶3-016. The definition of “expenditure on account of an employee” is discussed in ¶3-018. An “employee” is defined in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007; see ¶3-011. Refer also to the distinction between employees and independent contractors discussed at ¶3-376. Employers have an obligation to deduct PAYE in respect of employment income that is salary or wages or an extra pay. See ¶3012. With effect from 1 April 2019, an “unrepaid PAYE income overpayment” is included within employment income. To be an unrepaid PAYE income overpayment, the amount must first be a PAYE-related overpayment, meaning it was paid to an employee in error, the employee not being entitled to it, or be an advance payment to which the employee does not subsequently become entitled. The amount must also have originally been paid as salary or wages, an extra pay or a schedular payment (and note that if it is an unrepaid PAYE income overpayment then it will be treated in the same way). A PAYE-related overpayment will not be an employmentrelated loan for FBT purposes (see ¶21-340). To be an unrepaid PAYE income overpayment, the amount must also not have been repaid to the employer, be repayable under an agreement that has not been breached, or be recoverable under s 248 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001. To the extent any of these things have occurred, the amount will not be included in employment income. An amount of exempt income is not included. Law: IT07 ss CE 1–CE 7, RD 8B  ¶5-293 Attributed income from personal services Specific anti-avoidance rules in ss GB 27–GB 29 aim to prevent higher income earners from diverting personal services income to other associated entities such as companies and trusts. Under the attribution rules, the amount of income that is derived by the associated entity of a taxpayer who provides personal services is attributed (income) to that taxpayer after the deduction of allowable expenditure. The income is allocated to the income year in which it is attributed. Following the Supreme Court’s decision in Penny and Hooper v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-073 Inland Revenue (IR) issued Revenue Alert RA 11/02, which deals with the issue of diverting personal services income by structuring revenue earning activities through an associated entity such as a trading trust or company and the circumstances when IR will consider this arrangement is tax avoidance. It replaces Revenue Alerts RA 08/01 issued in March 2008 and RA 10/01 issued in June 2010. See further at ¶33-325. Law: IT07 ss CE 8, GB 27–GB 29  ¶5-297 Restrictive covenants and exit inducement payments Restrictive covenants Restrictive covenant payments are income to the recipient. This rule applies to payments made to employees (including prospective employees), office holders and independent contractors. If the payment is made to another person (ie not the person subject to the restrictive covenant), the payment is still income of the person subject to the restrictive covenant. The provision applies when a person gives an “undertaking” that restricts the person’s ability to perform services. The undertaking need not be legally enforceable for this rule to apply. If the payment is made to an employee, PAYE  must be deducted at the rate for extra pays and ACC earner’s levy must also be deducted. An exception exists for restrictive covenant payments made on the sale of a business or part of a business if it can be operated separately. All of the following criteria must be satisfied for this exception to apply: ▪ the amount is derived by person A as a result of the sale of a business by person A or an associated person to person B ▪ person A or the associated person and person B agree in writing that the transaction is a sale of a business ▪ the amount is consideration for an undertaking by person A not to provide goods or services in competition with the goods or services that person B provides from the business, and ▪ person A does not provide services to person B after the sale of the business (except temporary services that are incidental to the sale). The exception may also apply to the sale of all the shares in a company if the company (or another company that is wholly owned — whether directly or indirectly — by the company) is carrying on a business. In this case, person B in the above criteria means the company that carries on the business. See also ¶3-465. Anti-avoidance A specific anti-avoidance provision under s GB 30 exists for arrangements that have an effect of avoiding the application of the restrictive covenant rule. In this case, the Commissioner may treat: ▪ an amount provided under the arrangement as an amount to which the restrictive covenant rule applies, and ▪ a person affected by the arrangement as the person who gave the undertaking.  An example of an arrangement that may be subject to this provision is an arrangement that involves a collateral arrangement to dispose of property. Exit inducement payments Exit inducement payments are sometimes paid by a prospective employer to an employee to induce him or her to leave his or her existing position and accept a new position. Section CE 10 deems any amount derived by a person for loss of a vocation, position or status, or for leaving a position to be income. See ¶3-460. Law: IT07 ss CE 9, CE 10, GB 30  ¶5-300 Income protection insurance Amounts derived under an income protection insurance policy, where the person’s employer was liable to pay or contribute to the policy’s premium, will be income to the person. For deductibility of insurance premiums, see ¶10-540. Law: IT07 s CE 11  Income from living allowances, foreign superannuation, compensation and government grants ¶5-302 Income — accident compensation payments All payments of weekly compensation made by the ACC under the Accident Compensation Act 2001 (ACA) that are not recoverable under s 248 of that Act are income under s CF 1(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act 2007. Weekly compensation includes compensation for loss of earnings, or loss of potential earning capacity, and compensation for the spouse or partner, child, or other dependant of a deceased claimant. In addition, payments for attendant care (as defined in sch  1, cl 12 of the ACA) and a personal service rehabilitation payment under the ACA are also income under s CF 1(1)(a). Compensation payments paid under the Accident Compensation Act that are specifically stated to be exempt from income tax are set out at ¶5-653. Accident compensation payments are included in income in the year in which they are derived. Persons entitled to accident compensation may receive payment outside the income year in which their entitlement arose. The issue then becomes when such payments are derived for income tax purposes. See Case F157 (1984) 6 NZTC 60,350, Case H24 (1986) 8 NZTC 246, Case N9 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,075 and Case S9 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,084. As most employees operate on a cash basis, ACC payments are derived when they are received, and the payments may not be spread over the period between the earlier year of entitlement and the year of payment. Law: IT07 s CF 1(1)(a), (2)  ¶5-303 Income — ACC personal service rehabilitation payments An ACC personal service rehabilitation payment is a payment made by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) to an injured claimant to enable personal care to be provided to the claimant. Those services may be provided by an independent caregiver or under contract to the ACC. These payments fall within the definition of an accident compensation payment and are income of a claimant. The payments are schedular payments, so that ACC withholds 10.5% of the payment made to the claimant. There is an exemption from income tax if the total of the personal service rehabilitation payments paid to a claimant in the income year (including reimbursement payments of backdated personal service rehabilitation payments) does not exceed the payments the person makes to a provider in that or an earlier income year. In effect, if a claimant applies all his or her payments from ACC to obtain attendant care, no income tax obligation arises for the claimant.  A provider who receives personal service rehabilitation payments from an ACC claimant will include those payments as income as well as the amount of any tax credit allowed in respect of those payments. The provider is given a tax credit under s LB 7 for the amount of tax deducted by ACC from the payment, provided the payment is not a reimbursement payment. This ensures that the provider’s annual gross income figure is accurate for the tax year. If the payment is a reimbursement payment, the recipient ACC claimant will be given the tax credit under s LB 7. If an ACC claimant is paid a personal service rehabilitation payment by ACC but does not use all that payment to acquire personal care, then that payment is treated as income to the claimant for tax purposes. A deduction is available for the amount paid to a provider. The claimant can then seek a tax credit for the amount of any tax withheld in respect of the balance of the personal service rehabilitation payment retained by the claimant under s LB 8. See further ¶3-180 and ¶10-112. Law: IT07 ss CE 12, CF 1(1)(a), (2), CW 35, CZ 36, LB 7, LB 8, YA 1  ¶5-305 Income — education grants An education grant is income to the recipient. An education grant is a basic grant or an independent circumstances grant under regulations made under s 645 of the Education and Training Act 2020 (before 1 August 2020, s 303 of the Education Act 1989). However, any scholarship or bursary (other than those mentioned above) in respect of the recipient’s attendance at an educational institution is exempt income. See also s CW 36 and ¶5-633. Law: IT07 ss CF 1(1)(b), (2), CW 36  ¶5-307 Income — New Zealand superannuation and income-tested benefits All payments of New Zealand superannuation, income-tested benefits, veterans’ pensions and weekly compensation under the  Veterans’ Support Act 2014 are income. New Zealand superannuation means New Zealand superannuation payable under Pt 1 of the New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Income Act 2001. It also includes New Zealand superannuation equivalent assistance granted under the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support (NZSOS) Programme. The NZSOS Programme enables payments to be made to New Zealand beneficiaries and pensioners who are stranded overseas as a result of COVID-19, as these individuals would otherwise lose entitlement to their normal payments. Payments made under the NZSOS Programme are subject to the same tax treatment as their standard counterparts. New Zealand superannuation does not include: ▪ portable New Zealand superannuation (ie New Zealand superannuation paid or payable overseas under any of s 26(2) (a) or (b) or 31 of the New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Income Act 2001 or s 19 of the Social Welfare (Reciprocity Agreements, and New Zealand Artificial Limb Service) Act 1990), or ▪ certain funeral grants, the accommodation supplement, a special benefit or a disability allowance paid or payable under any of ss 65 (accommodation supplement), 85 (disability allowance), 90 (funeral grants, see also regulations made under s 427), and 96 (temporary additional support) of the Social Security Act 2018. An income-tested benefit is any of the following benefits paid under the Social Security Act 2018: ▪ sole parent support ▪ emergency benefit ▪ youth payment ▪ supported living payment  ▪ jobseeker support, and ▪ young parent payment. An income-tested benefit also includes main benefit equivalent assistance, which is special assistance granted under the NZSOS Programme that corresponds to any of the benefits set out above. A veteran’s pension is a veteran’s pension, other than a portable veteran’s pension, paid or payable under Pt 6 of the Veterans’ Support Act 2014. It also includes veteran’s pension equivalent assistance granted under the NZSOS Programme. Note that a payment of weekly compensation under the Veterans’ Support Act 2014 is made under subpart 5 of Pt 4 of that Act. Law: IT07 ss CF 1(1)(c), (e), (h), YA 1  ¶5-311 Income — paid parental leave A person’s income includes all payments of parental leave made under Pt 7A of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987. Paid parental leave is administered through Inland Revenue (IR). Form IR 880 must be completed by the employee and the income and work details must be confirmed by the employer, the employee’s chartered accountant or tax advisor, or a Justice of the Peace, and the form must then be filed with IR before the end of parental leave or before resignation. Law: IT07 s CF 1(1)(f)  ¶5-313 Income — earnings compensation A person’s income includes all payments of earnings compensation under the Compensation for Live Organ Donors Act 2016. Law: IT07 s CF 1(1)(fb)  ¶5-315 Income — pensions All pensions are income. Essentially, a pension takes the form of recurring gains and, as such, almost invariably constitutes income liable to tax unless otherwise expressly exempted from income tax. The most common form of pension income is New Zealand superannuation. This is deemed to be a form of salary or wages, enabling the deduction of PAYE tax deductions from payments of it. Note that with effect from 20 April 2020, New Zealand superannuation includes New Zealand superannuation equivalent assistance granted under the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support (NZSOS) Programme. The NZSOS Programme enables payments to be made to New Zealand beneficiaries and pensioners who are stranded overseas as a result of COVID-19, as these individuals would otherwise lose entitlement to their normal payments. Payments made under the NZSOS Programme are subject to the same tax treatment as their standard counterparts. The concept of taxable pensions includes certain gratuitous payments. These are payments that the person or the person’s parent, child, spouse, civil union or de facto partner (present or former) or dependant receives in consideration of past services to the payer. The gratuitous payment is to be included within the assessable income of the recipient. This treatment does not apply when an employer makes a payment to a person as a result of the death of that person’s parent, child, spouse, civil union or de facto partner (present or former) or dependant. To be exempt, payment must be made within 12 months of the date of death. From 1 April 2014, a cohesive set of rules apply to most interests in, and income from, foreign superannuation schemes: s CF 3. See ¶5317. The rules do not apply to periodic pensions or annuities. These continue to be taxed as they were before 1 April 2014 — that is, taxed on receipt at the person’s marginal tax rate. In addition, s CD 36B provides that an amount paid by a company that is a foreign  superannuation scheme will not be a dividend if it is derived by the person as a pension (see ¶16-733). The rules have also clarified that the definition of a foreign superannuation scheme does not include overseas social security schemes. Such schemes make payments similar to New Zealand Superannuation and it is considered appropriate that they be treated under the normal tax rules that apply to New Zealand pensions, and not under either the FIF rules or the rules in s CF 3. ▸Note: In January 2021, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 21/01, “Income tax – Monthly retirement payments from the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund”. The item concludes that, in general, monthly retirement payments received by retired United Nations (UN) staff members from the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund (UNJSPF) will be taxed as pensions. The two exceptions to this general rule are: ▪ where the retired UN staff member’s interest in the UNJSPF is covered by the FIF rules, or ▪ the transitional residency rules apply (see ¶5-700). Note that the payments are not exempt under the income tax exemption for diplomatic and consular officers (see ¶5-685). Law: IT07 ss CF 1(1)(g), (2), YA 1  ¶5-317 Taxation of interests in foreign superannuation schemes Before 1 April 2014, the rules for taxing New Zealand residents on their foreign superannuation were complex and difficult to understand. Some superannuation interests were subject to tax on