 defined to mean “a service that, at the time of the performance of the service, has no necessary connection between (a) the place where the service is physically performed; and (b) the location of the recipient of the services”. Whether a service is a “remote service” depends on whether the nature of the service requires that the recipient is present when the service is physically performed. If a service is either actually supplied, or is capable of being supplied, when the recipient is not present, the test is satisfied, because there is no necessary connection between the physical location of the recipient and the place of physical performance. Examples of services that could be supplied as remote services include: ▪ supplies of digital content, such as e-books, movies, TV shows, music and online newspaper subscriptions ▪ online supplies of games, apps, software and software maintenance ▪ webinars or distance learning courses ▪ insurance services  ▪ gambling services ▪ website design or publishing services, and ▪ legal, accounting or consultancy services. Example 1: Accommodation Co is a non-resident company that provides facilitation services, by matching customers who are looking for accommodation in a particular location with local accommodation providers. The facilitation services provided by Accommodation Co to the local accommodation providers are remote services, as there is no necessary connection between the location of the recipients and the place where the facilitation services are performed. If the local providers are not registered for GST, these supplies will be subject to GST under s 8(3)(c), as the facilitation services are remote services that are supplied to a New Zealand resident who is not a GST-registered business. If the local providers are registered for GST, then under s 8(4D), the facilitation services will be treated as being supplied outside New Zealand. If Accommodation Co incurs New Zealand GST costs, it may wish to zero-rate the services, as this would allow them to deduct the costs incurred in New Zealand in making the supplies.  Determining whether a customer is resident in New Zealand Non-resident suppliers are required to determine whether a customer is a New Zealand resident. The non-resident supplier is required to treat a customer as a New Zealand resident on the basis of two non-contradictory pieces of evidence that support that conclusion. The rules provide the following list of items that can be used for this purpose: ▪ the person’s billing address ▪ the internet protocol (IP) address of the device used by the person or another geolocation method ▪ the person’s bank details, including the account the person uses for payment or the billing address held by the bank  ▪ the mobile country code of the international mobile subscriber identity stored on the subscriber identity module (SIM) card used by the person ▪ the location of the person’s fixed land line through which the service is supplied to them, and ▪ other commercially relevant information. Examples of other commercially relevant information are the customer’s trading history (such as the previous billing address of the customer) or the product purchased if it is linked to a geographic location (for example, some gift cards may only be used in a particular country). Information provided by a third party, such as by a payment service provider, can also be used if it is commercially relevant. When evidence supports two places of residence If a supplier has more than one set of evidence that meets the test of two non-contradictory pieces, where one set supports the conclusion that the customer is resident in New Zealand and another supports the conclusion that the customer is resident in another country, the supplier is required to choose the more reliable set of evidence. Which items are more reliable will depend on the circumstances. For example, where the supplier applies the same price regardless of the country of the customer, the recipient’s billing address could be a more reliable indicator than would otherwise be the case. Example 2: Jacob, a New Zealand tax resident, purchases a navigational app on his phone while on holiday in the United States. The app store collects two pieces of evidence that supports the conclusion that Jacob is resident in New Zealand — his credit card information and the records of his billing addresses from transaction history with the app store. The app store also has two pieces of evidence that suggest Jacob is resident in the United States — the SIM card in the phone he is using and his IP address. Section 8B(3)(a) requires the app store to use the set of evidence that is more reliable to determine whether GST applies in New Zealand.  The app store has implemented system rules that give priority to its customers’ credit card information and transaction history, as these indicators are more reliable in the context of their business. On this basis, the app store treats Jacob as a New Zealand resident, and charges New Zealand GST on the supply.  Alternative methods for determining residence of customer If a supplier is unable to establish a customer’s residence on the basis of two non-contradictory items from the list, the Commissioner may prescribe the use of another method or may agree with the supplier on the use of another method. When prescribing or agreeing to the use of an alternative method, the Commissioner may take into account the following factors: ▪ the nature of the supply, including, for example: □ whether the supply is made in a low-value high-volume digital context □ whether the supply is a single instance or a supply made as part of a continuing relationship between the recipient and the supplier ▪ the availability to the supplier of information about the recipient’s residence. Determining whether a customer is GST-registered Non-resident suppliers are required to presume that a New Zealandresident customer is not a registered person unless the customer has provided their GST registration number, New Zealand business number or notified their status as a registered person. The Commissioner is also able to prescribe or agree to an alternative method of determining whether the supply is made to a GST-registered person. In prescribing or agreeing to an alternative method, the Commissioner may take into account the following factors: ▪ the nature of the supply, including, for example, whether the supply is of goods and services that are purchased only by a  registered person in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity ▪ the value of the supply, including, for example, whether the supply is of a value that would be expected to be received only by a registered person in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity ▪ the terms and conditions related to the provision of the goods and services, including, for example, whether the supply is of goods and services that may be leased, licensed, or otherwise made available, for use by a registered person in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity. Invoices A non-resident supplier does not need to provide a tax invoice for supplies of remote services under s 8(3)(c). However, in the event that a GST-registered business is incorrectly charged GST, if the value of the supply (excluding GST) (before 1 December 2019, the GST-inclusive consideration in money for the supply) is $1,000 or less (in New Zealand currency as at the time of the supply), a non-resident supplier has the option to provide a tax invoice to the purchaser to allow them to claim a deduction, rather than to refund the GST charged: s 24(5B). Input tax deductions A recipient is not able to claim an input tax deduction for a supply of remote services, unless the recipient has obtained a tax invoice under s 24(5B) (where the recipient was incorrectly charged GST and the value of the supply (before 1 December 2019, the consideration for the supply) is NZ$1,000 or less). The recipient is not denied an input tax deduction when the supply is treated as made in New Zealand by the recipient of the supply (under s 5B) and the recipient has accounted for the output tax on the supply. Incorrect GST treatment  When a GST-registered recipient is incorrectly charged GST, a nonresident supplier may make an output tax adjustment in the return when it is apparent that a mistake has been made. This applies when: ▪ the supply was standard-rated when it should not have been treated as a taxable supply and no election to provide a tax invoice was made under s 24(5B) (s 25(1)(aab)), or ▪ the supply was standard-rated when it should have been zerorated (s 25(1)(abb)). As stated above, a non-resident supplier has the option to issue a tax invoice when the recipient has been inadvertently charged GST, but only when the value of the supply (before 1 December 2019, the consideration for the supply) is NZ$1,000 or less, and the recipient notifies the supplier that he or she is a registered person: s 24(5B). When the remote supply has been incorrectly taxed, and the supplier opts to issue an invoice, the invoice must contain all the details in s 24(3). The provision of a tax invoice allows the GST-registered recipient to claim the inadvertently charged GST to the extent to which the recipient uses the services, or the services are available for use, in making taxable supplies. The option to provide a tax invoice is not available to the supply of a contract of insurance. When a non-resident supplier opts to provide a tax invoice under s 24(5B): ▪ the supplier must not make an adjustment under s 25 to correct the amount of GST shown on the invoice ▪ the supplier and recipient are deemed to have agreed that the supply is made in New Zealand (and so is subject to GST) under s 8(4), and ▪ the zero-rating provision under s 11A(1)(x) does not apply. Reverse charge  The existing reverse charge mechanism has been extended to supplies of remote services that are not treated as being made in New Zealand under s 8(4) and (4D). The reverse charge applies if the percentage intended or actual use of the services is less than 95% of the total use. The reverse charge treats the services as being made in New Zealand by the recipient in the course and furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by the recipient (see s 5B). A new reverse charge applies in relation to zero-rated supplies received by a registered person. Section 20(3JC) requires the recipient of a remote service that is zero-rated under s 11A(1)(j) or (x) to return output tax on the nominal GST component for any nontaxable use of the services. This section only applies when, at the time of acquisition, or at the end of an adjustment period, the taxable use of the service is less than 95%. Non-double taxation rule Under the current place of supply rules, GST would apply to services that are physically performed in New Zealand and supplied to a nonresident who is in New Zealand. However, according to the OECD guidelines, if that service was a remote service, the country of the consumer’s usual residence would have taxing rights over this consumption. Section 20(3)(dc) prevents double taxation from arising on supplies of remote services physically performed in New Zealand and received by a non-resident consumer in New Zealand, by allowing a deduction that offsets their liability for New Zealand GST to the extent that the supply has already been subject to a consumption tax in another jurisdiction. Electronic marketplaces Special rules apply when remote services are supplied through an electronic marketplace to a New Zealand-resident consumer. The rules require the operator of the marketplace (such as an application store), as opposed to the underlying supplier, to register and return GST. Definition of “electronic marketplace”  The definition of “electronic marketplace” is: ▪ a marketplace that is operated by electronic means through which a person (the underlying supplier) makes a supply of goods or of remote services by electronic means through another person (the operator of the marketplace) to a third person (the recipient), and ▪ includes a website, internet portal, gateway, store, distribution platform, or other similar marketplace, and ▪ does not include a marketplace that solely processes payments. The definition is not intended to include “click-through entities” (entities where the ultimate purchaser can click-through a link on their webpage to the supplier). Operator of electronic marketplace When a supply of remote services is made through an operator (before 1 December 2019, a non-resident operator) of an electronic marketplace to a person resident in New Zealand, the operator of the marketplace is treated as making the supply in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity. Note that when the marketplace rules were extended to electronic marketplaces operated by New Zealand residents, an unintended consequence was that the rules also applied to purely domestic arrangements and overrode the existing agency rules in most cases. A retrospective amendment was enacted to ensure the marketplace rules do not apply where the supplies of remote services are made by New Zealand resident underlying suppliers through marketplaces operated by New Zealand residents. Therefore, where the marketplace is operated by a resident, the underlying supplier must be a non-resident for the marketplace rules to operate. A savings provision exists for taxpayers who took an inconsistent tax position in the period from 1 December 2019 to 22 March 2020. Where the marketplace rules apply, the operator is not treated as making the supply if:  ▪ the documentation provided to the recipient identifies the supply as made by the underlying supplier and not the marketplace, and ▪ the underlying supplier and the operator of the marketplace have agreed that the supplier is liable for the payment of tax, and ▪ the marketplace does not: □ authorise the charge to the recipient, or □ make or authorise the delivery of the supply to the recipient, or □ directly or indirectly set a term or condition under which the supply is made. Where the operator is treated as making the supply, the operator is responsible for returning GST. They include these supplies in their turnover for the purpose of determining whether the registration threshold is exceeded and, if it is exceeded, are liable for the GST. If, in relation to a single supply of remote services, more than one operator of an electronic marketplace is liable for tax on the supply, the first operator that authorises a charge or receives consideration for the supply is treated as making the supply. If no operator exists that meets this requirement, the first operator that authorises delivery of the supply is treated as making the supply. Approved marketplaces Section 60D allows non-electronic marketplaces (such as a marketplace for insurance) to register and return GST. Under the provision, the supply of remote services through a non-electronic marketplace (before 1 December 2019, operated by a non-resident) to a New Zealand resident may be treated as a supply by the operator, not the underlying supplier, if the Commissioner agrees. The operator must apply to the Commissioner and the Commissioner may take the following into account in exercising her discretion:  ▪ whether the marketplace is best placed to determine whether the recipient of the supply of remote services: □ is resident in New Zealand, or □ is a registered person ▪ whether the number of underlying suppliers to the marketplace means that return requirements are better satisfied by the marketplace rather than the individual underlying suppliers. Note that, as discussed above in relation to electronic marketplaces, the change to include marketplaces operated by New Zealand residents also caused an unintended consequence in relation to approved marketplaces. A similar retrospective amendment to that enacted for electronic marketplaces was also enacted for approved markets under s 60D. Therefore, for the section to apply where the marketplace is operated by a resident, the underlying supplier must be a non-resident. A savings provision exists for taxpayers who took an inconsistent tax position in the period from 1 December 2019 to 22 March 2020. Specific rule for underlying suppliers A specific rule applies to suppliers (before 1 December, New Zealand-resident suppliers only) supplying remote services through an electronic or approved marketplace: s 60(1C). These underlying suppliers may already be registered for GST under the existing rules. If these suppliers were subject to the general rule, the services they supply through the marketplace would no longer be taxable, because the operator of the marketplace would be treated as the supplier. This would mean that GST incurred by the underlying supplier in making these supplies would be unrecoverable. The rule therefore treats the supply of remote services as two separate supplies in these circumstances — a supply of services from the underlying supplier to the operator of the marketplace, and a supply of those services from the operator to the recipient. The first supply to the operator of the marketplace is zero-rated under s  11A(1)(jc). This will enable the underlying supplier to recover the GST costs incurred in making the supply. Example 3: A Co. is a property developer, and makes 80% taxable supplies and 20% exempt supplies. It issues a bond to raise capital to finance the purchase of land. In issuing the bond, it spends $11,500 in legal fees, including GST of $1,500. A Co. claims a deduction of $1,200 (80% of $1,500) based on A Co.’s usual ratio of taxable to exempt supplies (excluding the bond issue itself). Because the bond issue is a supply of an exempt financial service and not a zerorated supply, A Co. is not required to include the amount of consideration for the supply in Boxes 5 and 6 of its GST return. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 95.  Discounts provided by marketplace owners With effect from 1 December 2019, the amount of GST that a marketplace operator is required to return on a supply of discounted remote services that it is treated as being the supplier of under s 60C or 60D has been clarified. Where the operator provides a discount for a product sold on its marketplace by an underlying supplier to a New Zealand consumer, the marketplace operator is only required to return GST on the reduced price, ie the amount the consumer actually paid for the supply of services (and not on the amount of the discount provided by the marketplace). See s 10(7D). Bad debt deduction rule Another recent change provides relief in situations where an operator of a marketplace may not receive the payment for a supply of remote services sold on its marketplace by an underlying supplier (as the payment may be made by the recipient directly to the underlying supplier) and is unable to collect the amount of GST that it is required to return on the supply from the underlying supplier. A special bad debt deduction rule has been introduced that applies only to marketplace operators. Under the rule, a marketplace operator is only able to claim a bad debt deduction in its GST return if it wrote off the full amount of money owed by the underlying  supplier in relation to the supply, including the marketplace’s sales commission or facilitation fee. A marketplace operator that claims a bad debt deduction and later recovers all or some of the debt in a subsequent taxable period will be required to return GST to the extent of the recovery. See s 26AA. Agency rules A New Zealand-resident agent making a supply of remote services to a New Zealand resident on behalf of a non-resident principal is allowed to agree with the principal that the agent, and not the principal, is treated as making the supply: s 60(1A) and (1AB). This will allow, for example, New Zealand coverholders to register and return GST instead of the underlying non-resident insurer or marketplace, as they are also likely to be in a better position to return the GST. General insurance services General insurance services are subject to special GST rules that apply GST on a net basis. These special rules have been extended to cross-border supplies of insurance services provided to New Zealand-resident consumers. Insurance services are an example of “remote services”, because there is no requirement for the recipient to be present when the services are performed. As with other supplies of remote services under the amendments, the rules: ▪ apply GST to insurance services supplied by offshore insurers to New Zealand-resident consumers, and ▪ exclude insurance services supplied by offshore insurers to New Zealand GST-registered businesses from GST, unless the insurer chooses to treat the supply as made in New Zealand so that the supply will be zero-rated. When an offshore insurer chooses that supplies of insurance services are zero-rated, the insurer is not entitled to a deduction for insurance payments on payments to that GST-registered recipient,  and the GST-registered recipient of the payment is not required to return output tax under s 5(13). The reverse-charge provisions in ss 8(4B) and 20(3JC) apply when a GST-registered business purchases insurance services that relate partly to private or exempt use. The option to provide a tax invoice when GST is inadvertently charged on a supply with a value of NZ$1,000 or less is not available for insurance premiums charged to GST-registered businesses. Gambling services Section 5(10B) treats payments by a New Zealand resident for remote gambling services or prize competitions performed outside New Zealand as payment for the supply of services by the person who conducts the gambling or prize competition. The definition of “gambling” under the Gambling Act 2003 applies. Section 10(14B) applies to determine the consideration for the supply of remote gambling services or prize competitions. The amount of consideration is: amounts received from residents − prizes paid to residents where: amounts received from residents is the total amount in money received in relation to the supply by the non-resident person who conducts the gambling or prize competition from all New Zealand residents, and prizes paid to residents is the total amount of all prizes paid and payable in money to New Zealand residents in relation to the supply. Any New Zealand losses are required to be carried forward and offset against future New Zealand winnings. This ensures that offshore suppliers of gambling services do not return an excessive amount of GST when prizes are won or claim excessive refunds on losses.  Misrepresentations by recipients of remote services The Commissioner has a discretion to treat a person who receives a supply of remote services as if they were making a supply of services and are therefore liable to register and pay the GST that should have been charged. The discretion applies when the person has, for the purposes of avoiding paying tax, knowingly provided incorrect information that leads to GST not being charged on a supply, and this behaviour is repeated or a substantial amount of GST is involved. A recipient who is treated as a supplier is treated as registered from the date on which the services are physically performed. Offences A recipient of a supply of remote services commits a knowledge offence if they knowingly provide altered, false or misleading information about their residency or GST registration status to avoid being charged GST (s 143A(1)(g) of the Tax Administration Act 1994). In addition, with effect from 23 March 2020, an underlying supplier supplying remote services through a marketplace commits a knowledge offence if the supplier knowingly provides altered, false or misleading information relating to the country or territory in which they are resident (s 143A(1)(h)). Such misinformation could result in the operator of the marketplace underpaying GST to Inland Revenue. For a discussion of knowledge offences, see ¶14-250. Taxable periods Between 1 October 2016 and 31 March 2017, a non-resident supplier of remote services that was taxed under the rules had a default taxable period of six months, with the option of a two-monthly taxable period. However, from 1 April 2017, these suppliers have calendar quarterly taxable periods, ie periods ending on the last day of March, June, September and December. Pay-only return  Because many non-resident suppliers will not incur GST costs in New Zealand and therefore will not need to claim back any GST in their returns, a simplified “pay-only” return is available that only includes the fields that are not relevant to returning GST, such as the amount of supplies to customers resident in New Zealand and the GST required to be paid. Non-resident suppliers that are claiming input tax deductions for any New Zealand GST costs will be required to file a full GST return. Expressing amounts in a foreign currency A non-resident supplier of remote services that are taxed under the rules may choose to express the amount of consideration for their supplies in a foreign currency as at the time of supply. If they elect to use the foreign currency, they can convert the amounts into New Zealand currency using the conversion rate at: ▪ the last day of the relevant taxable period ▪ the date the supply was made ▪ the date of filing (or the due date if the return is filed after the due date), or ▪ another date agreed between the supplier and the Commissioner. Any election to use a foreign currency may not be revoked for at least 24 months, unless the Commissioner agrees otherwise. Holding records outside New Zealand and in a language other than English or te reo Māori Section 75(3F) provides an automatic exception for non-resident suppliers who only supply remote services or distantly taxable goods from the requirement to keep and retain records in English or te reo Māori or at a place in New Zealand. They are also not required to seek approval from the Commissioner to keep records outside New Zealand or in a language other than English or te reo Māori. Exception from the bank account requirement  Section 55B(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides an exception for non-residents to the requirement for an offshore person to have a fully functional New Zealand bank account to obtain an Inland Revenue number where the Inland Revenue number is required solely because they are registering for GST (whether under the usual registration rules in s 51 or the non-resident registration rules in s 54B). Transitional provision For some fixed-term contracts (such as contracts of insurance) that spanned the application date of the new rules, it may have been administratively difficult to adjust the consideration for the supply if periodic payments were made and the new rules required those payments made after 1 October 2016 to be subject to GST. To deal with this situation, a transitional provision applied for the term of the contract or until 31 October 2017, whichever was earlier. For further discussion on the remote services rules, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 6, July 2016 at 12–29. Law: GST ss 2(1), 5(10B), (13), (27), 5B, 8(3)(c), (4), (4B), (4D), 8B, 8BB, 10(14B)–(14F), 11A(1)(x), (7), 15(6), 20(3)(dc), (3JC), (4C), (4D), 24(4), (5)–(5D), 24B, 25(1)(aab), (abb), 25AA, 51(1C), 51B(7), 60(1A), (1AB), (1C), 60C, 60D, 75(3F), 77, 85B; TAA ss 55B(2), 143A(1)(g)  ¶32-068 GST and local authorities Financial contributions made under the Resource Management Act 1991 Contributions of money or land paid to local authorities under the Resource Management Act (RMA) are subject to GST. It was always intended that these types of payments would be subject to GST; however, the courts have not interpreted the legislation in this way (see Chatham Islands Enterprise Trust v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,075 (CA) and C of IR v New Zealand Refining Co Ltd (1997) 18 NZTC 13,187 (CA)).  For GST purposes, a local authority is treated as supplying goods and services to a person if the local authority requires from the person: ▪ a financial contribution that is a condition of a resource consent under the RMA, or ▪ a development contribution under the Local Government Act 2002. Similarly, a person who makes a contribution of land to a local authority as a condition of a resource consent or as a development contribution is treated as supplying goods and services to the local authority. See s 5(7B) and (7C) of the GST Act. Resource consent applications A resource consent may be required for the use of land or other natural resources and can be granted subject to certain conditions. Conditions may include requiring the consent holder to provide services or works and/or provide information relating to the exercise of a resource consent or to transfer land. A fee is payable for applications for resource consent. On 9 September 2008 IR released interpretation statement IS 08/03, “Resource consent application fees and provision of works, provision of information and transfer of land as conditions of resource consent — GST treatment”. Refer to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 8, September/October 2008 at 15. It addresses the GST treatment of resource consent application fees paid to local authorities and the GST consequences where resource consent is given subject to conditions relating to the provision of works or services, the provision of information or the transfer of land. Transfer of land A local authority that grants subdivision consent subject to the transfer of land does not supply resource consent or any other services for the supply of land by the applicant. The transfer of land required as a condition of subdivision consent is not consideration for the supply of goods or services by a local authority. The  consideration is the compensation agreed between the parties or determined in accordance with the procedure in s 237H of the RMA. Accordingly, if a subdivider is a registered person and the supply of land is made in the course or furtherance of their taxable activity, GST is chargeable on the compensation received. The local authority is entitled to a credit for input tax on the compensation paid as the land is acquired in the course or furtherance of the local authority’s taxable activity. Provision of works and/or information If a consent holder makes a supply of services by carrying out works, consideration is not given for the supply in the form of the grant of resource consent or for the supply of any other services by a local authority. GST is not chargeable on the supply of the provision of works by a consent holder who is registered for GST. If a local authority pays compensation to a consent holder for works required as a condition of resource consent over and above the requirements of the activity for which consent is given, the compensation is consideration for the supply of services by the consent holder. If the consent holder is a registered person and the activity for which the consent is given is carried out in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity, GST is chargeable on the compensation paid. If the activity for which consent is granted is part of a taxable activity carried on by the applicant and the activity could not be carried out unless works required as a condition of resource consent are provided, an input tax credit is allowable for goods and services acquired to carry out such works. Local authorities do not supply goods or services for the provision of information required as a condition of resource consent. The provision of information under a condition of resource consent does not constitute a supply of services by a consent holder. Land contributions A contribution of land made as a condition of a resource consent or as a development contribution is zero-rated for GST purposes. See s  11B(1B) and (1C). This avoids any difficulty in determining the value of the land at the time the contribution is made. Infringement fees In February 2017, Inland Revenue released public ruling, BR Pub 17/03, “Goods and Services Tax — traffic enforcement activities by local authorities — GST output tax on infringement fees retained — treatment of fines — GST input tax on acquisition of goods and services” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 3, April 2017 at 2). The ruling sets out the Commissioner’s view that traffic infringement fees (commonly arising from parking offences) retained by local authorities under s 141 of the Land Transport Act 1998 are not subject to GST. Notwithstanding this, input tax deductions are still available to the extent that goods and services are used in traffic law enforcement services or in making taxable supplies. Law: GST ss 5(7B), (7C), 11B(1B), (1C)  ¶32-069 GST and hire firm security bonds and late return charges Hire firm security bonds The GST implications of a customer paying a bond to a GST registered hirer of goods as security when the goods are hired are considered in “Question We’ve Been Asked”, QB 14/06: “GST — Hire firm security bonds” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 131). QB 14/06 concludes that the paying of the bond has no GST effect because there are no services supplied in return for the bond. If the bond is repaid in full on the return of the goods, the answer remains the same. However, where, or to the extent, the bond is forfeited because it is applied in accordance with the agreement between the parties: ▪ as payment of an extra hire charge because the goods are returned late, then it is consideration for a supply and is subject to GST  ▪ as compensation for damage to, or loss of, the goods, then it is not consideration for a supply and is not subject to GST ▪ for the purchase of goods or services, then it is consideration for a supply and is subject to GST, or ▪ for a breach of a condition (eg operating the goods in a way not permitted under the hire agreement), it is not consideration for a supply and it is not subject to GST. Late return charges The Commissioner has also released “Question We’ve Been Asked”, QB 14/14, “Goods and services tax — Late return charges (including library fines and parking overstay charges)” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 1, February 2015 at 40). The item concerns charges imposed for the late return of a borrowed item, referred to collectively as “late return charges”. The Commissioner considers the law in this area to be well settled. The principles are as set out in QB 14/06 above and the interpretation statement on court awards and out-ofcourt settlements (see ¶32-071). The item concludes that a late return charge will be subject to GST if it is consideration for a taxable supply. Whether the charge is consideration for a taxable supply will depend on whether a sufficient nexus or reciprocity exists between the charge and the supply. This will be determined from the legal arrangements entered into. In most cases, a late return charge will be subject to GST. This is because the legal arrangements between the parties will characterise the charge as additional consideration for the supply of the borrowed item. However, in some cases, the legal arrangements between the parties may characterise the late return charge as a payment of damages or a penalty for a breach of the legal arrangements. In these cases, the charge will not be subject to GST because it will not be consideration for a taxable supply.  ¶32-070 GST and payments made by parents or guardians of students to state schools  The GST treatment of payments made by parents or guardians of students to state schools is considered in public binding ruling BR Pub 18/06, “Goods and services tax — Payments made by parents to state and state integrated schools” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 3). The ruling is a reissue of the earlier ruling, BR Pub 14/06. BR Pub 18/06 does not reflect any material change in the Commissioner’s position on the GST treatment of payments made by parents to the Boards of Trustees, but some parts have been rewritten to improve readability and legislative changes have been included. The ruling applies in respect of ss 8 and 10(2) and the definition of “consideration” in s 2 of the GST Act. Briefly, the ruling provides that payments made by parents or guardians of children to the Board of Trustees of state or state integrated schools to assist the school with the cost of delivering the education services that the student has a statutory entitlement to receive free of charge are not subject to GST. These payments may be described as “school fees”, “activity fees” or otherwise. For the payment to be exempt, the children must be New Zealand citizens or New Zealand residents (or are otherwise not international students under the Education Act 1989). However, if other services, not integral to the supply of education services, are supplied on the basis that the supply is conditional upon payment being made, the payment will be subject to GST. If a separate charge is not made for such an item, apportionment may apply, refer s 10(18). For payments to be “consideration”, it must be possible to identify a supply of goods or services other than the supply of education services. The issues that need to be contemplated are: ▪ whether what is provided (to students) is within the scope of the statutory entitlement to education services, and ▪ if the supply made is outside the scope of the statutory entitlement, whether there is a sufficient relationship between the supply and the payment.  This ruling applies for the period from 21 June 2018 to 20 June 2023.  ¶32-071 GST and court awards and out-of-court settlements Inland Revenue (IR) published an interpretation statement regarding the GST treatment of court awards and out-of-court settlements in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 14, No 10, October 2002 at 21. The statement adopts the view that for GST to be payable upon a payment arising from a court award or out-of-court settlement, the payment must be consideration for a supply or an adjustment to consideration for an earlier supply. Some element of reciprocity must be present to link a consideration to a supply for that supply to be subject to GST. Reciprocity is evidenced by any legally enforceable obligations between the payer and the supplier that may arise as a result of the agreement of the parties or be imposed between the parties by a court. Obligations may be legally enforceable through statute, common law or in equity. Payments that relate to a supply but are not for that supply will not be consideration. Briefly, the statement provides the following: ▪ If the payment is consideration for a supply, the supplier will be liable to GST if the supply was made in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity. ▪ If the payment is a variation of the previously agreed consideration and within the scope of s 25 of the GST Act, a GST adjustment may need to be made by the relevant parties. ▪ If a global award is made by the court and part of the award is payment for a taxable supply, apportionment must be undertaken pursuant to s 10(18) and the amount properly attributable to the taxable supply ascertained. ▪ If the payment is within the scope of s 20A(4) (being the recovery of a sum expended in determining liability to tax as defined in s  20A(2)), the Act operates to deem the payment to be in return for taxable supplies, and output tax is payable. Where a payment is for loss or damage it will not be consideration for a supply and there will be no element of reciprocity between the parties; rather, the payment is to compensate one party for the loss caused by the wrongful act of the other. Costs awarded by a court to a successful litigant should be treated in the same way as an award of damages, ie GST will not generally arise because no underlying supply has been made. See Case S65 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,408 and Thoroughbred & Classic Car Owners’ Club Inc v Coleman CA203/93, 25 November 1993. An exception arguably arises in cases involving income tax or GST disputes where costs are awarded to a taxpayer. Section 20A(4) deems an award of costs to be supplied in the course of a taxable activity, so output tax will be payable by the taxpayer. Arguably, any costs award should therefore either have GST added to it or be expressed as “inclusive of GST”. In Adcock and Devir v Marlborough District Council (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-029 the District Court considered whether GST would be included in costs and concluded that GST was not to be added to costs awarded. If an award is subject to GST and no allowance was made for the GST liability in the amount of the award, the person making the payment might get a windfall by way of input tax credits refunded from IR with the recipient being required to account for GST on the sum.  ¶32-072 GST and facilitation fees charged by inbound tour operators Subsections 8(2B), (2C), (2D), (2E) and (2F) clarify that the facilitation fee charged by inbound tour operators is liable for GST at the standard rate. The facilitation fee is for services that a registered person provides to package one or more domestic tourism products and services in  New Zealand and sell them outside New Zealand to a non-resident person. The tourism products and services may include accommodation, meals, transport, and other activities. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 1, February 2010 at 31. In Case 14/2014 (2014) 26 NZTC ¶2-024, the Taxation Review Authority (TRA) held that GST zero-rating did not apply to taxable supplies of advisory services to cruise lines, incentive houses and overseas travel agents. The TRA said that taxable supplies to overseas operators could be zero-rated under s 11A(1)(k) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 in certain circumstances but, in this case, ss 8(2B) and 11A(2) applied to exclude zero-rating. The taxpayer contended that it did not package or sell domestic tourism products to overseas operators and to the extent that it acted on behalf of the overseas operators in New Zealand it did so as their agent. The taxpayer further contended that in providing the advisory services to the overseas operators it did so for the benefit of those operators. The benefit of the advisory services was not received in New Zealand by any other person. The TRA dismissed the taxpayer’s contentions. It held there was no evidence of any agency relationship and the advisory services provided by the taxpayer consisted of the facilitation of inbound tour operations for s 8(2B). The TRA also held that the performance of the domestic products and services provided by the taxpayer were received in New Zealand by the non-resident tourists. There was insufficient economic distinction between the advisory services and the supply of the domestic tourism products and services; they were integral, ancillary and/or incidental to the supply of the domestic tourism products. The TRA’s decision was upheld on appeal to the High Court — see ID Tours New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (2015) 27 NZTC ¶22-001. Law: GST s 8(2B)–(2F)  ACCOUNTING FOR GST ¶32-073 Returns and payment of GST  Returns must be made by a registered person on a regular basis. The amount of tax payable by the registered person (or refundable by the Commissioner) for a specific period is set out in the return. The period covered in the return is called the “taxable period”. See ¶32-090. Filing and due dates Returns must be filed and GST paid by the following dates: ▪ the 15th day of January, if the month following the end of the taxable period is December ▪ the 7th day of May, if the month following the end of the taxable period is April, or ▪ in all other cases, the 28th day of the month following the end of the taxable period. For a discussion of when tax payments are received, see standard practice statement, SPS 20/04, “Tax payments — when received in time”. See ¶2-115. Interest and late payment penalties are added to late payments. Interest is payable by the Commissioner if refunds for taxable periods are not paid promptly. See ¶14-200. Regarding late filing penalties, see ¶32-223. Note that a provision allows for the setting of a taxable supplies threshold above which GST-registered persons will be required to file their GST return with IR electronically in a prescribed format. The threshold will be set separately by Order in Council, but this has not occurred yet. See further at ¶2-019. A non-electronic filing penalty will also apply (see ¶14-045). Self-assessment A feature of the GST system is that the tax is essentially selfassessed. GST is to be paid to (or refunded by) IR in accordance with information supplied in a furnished return. Under s 92B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) a registered person is required to  make an assessment of the GST payable by them for the return period and the assessment is made on the date on which the taxpayer’s return is received at the office of IR. The self-assessment provision also applies to any person required to provide a special return under s 17 or a return under s 19B of the GST Act for a change in accounting basis. The self-assessment provision does not apply to a taxpayer for a GST return period if IR has made an assessment of the GST payable by the taxpayer for the return period. See s 92B(3) of the TAA. The Commissioner will only intervene in limited situations, such as where a return is not forthcoming or where the Commissioner is dissatisfied with a furnished return. See s 106(1D) of the TAA. Law: GST ss 15, 16, 23; TAA ss 36BD, 40(3), 92B  ¶32-074 Correcting errors in GST returns If a person’s GST return contains one or more errors and the total tax discrepancy caused by the error or errors is $1,000 or less per return or the error or errors are not material for the person, then the person is allowed to rectify the error or errors in the next return due after discovering them. See s 113A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The maximum tax discrepancy amount of $1,000 applies to the return in which the error or errors were originally made, not to the return in which the error or errors are corrected. Tax discrepancies caused by errors in different return periods cannot be averaged to fit within the $1,000 limit. However, if the discrepancy caused exceeds the $1,000 limit, the person may still rectify the error or errors in a subsequent GST return if, for that person, the error or errors are not material errors. For these purposes, the error or errors are not material if the total tax discrepancy caused by the error or errors in the return is equal to or less than the lower of $10,000 and 2% of the person’s GST output tax. However, note that a person will not be able to correct the error or errors if they have applied the materiality  threshold for the main purpose of delaying the payment of tax. See s 113A(5) of the TAA. Example: Correction of immaterial errors Bary’s Brownies and Liquorice Rolls Ltd (BBLR Ltd) sells confectionaries in its 35 stores throughout New Zealand. Its GST returns are filed on a 2-monthly basis. BBLR Ltd realises it made an error in its GST return for the period ending 30 September 2019 when one of the stores sends additional information about its sales to the head office in early November 2019. The amount of sales not recorded in the GST return was $8,000. This resulted in an understatement of the business’s taxable supplies of $8,000 and a tax discrepancy in the assessment of $1,200 (that is, $8,000 × 15%). BBLR Ltd cannot rely on s 113A(1) to correct the error in the GST return for the period ending 30 November 2019. This is because the tax discrepancy caused by the error is more than $1,000. To determine whether BBLR Ltd can correct the error in the next return due, it needs to determine whether the error is a material error for the purposes of s 113A. The total taxable supplies in BBLR Ltd’s GST return for the period ending 30 September 2019 was $450,000. The amount of the tax discrepancy in the assessment resulting from not including the $8,000 worth of supplies from one of its stores is $1,200. The amount of the error is less than both $10,000 and 2% of BBLR Ltd’s output tax payable for the period. This means BBLR Ltd can correct the error by including the missed sales in the following GST return for the period ending 30 November 2019. It does not need to notify Inland Revenue that the sales relate to an earlier period in the return. If a subsequent error is later discovered that also meets the criteria of being less than both $10,000 and 2% of the output tax payable for the period, that error or errors can also be corrected in the next return due following discovery of that error or errors. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 66.  If the error or errors exceed the above thresholds, the registered person must correct the errors either by requesting the Commissioner exercise her discretion to amend an assessment under s 113 of the TAA or through the disputes resolution process. See also ¶2-112 for further discussion. Note that in October 2019, Inland Revenue released a draft Question We’ve Been Asked, PUB00352, “Changing GST treatment after reducing the previously agreed consideration”, which considered how the GST treatment of a supply can be adjusted if a supplier accounted for output tax incorrectly and subsequently reduced the previously agreed consideration for a supply. The draft item  considered the situation when a supplier had charged and accounted for GST on a supply and then later established the supply was not a taxable supply and agreed to reduce the consideration by the amount of the GST charged. The draft item concluded that in these circumstances s 25 of the Goods and Services Tax Act would only allow an adjustment of an amount equal to GST on the amount by which the consideration was reduced. To have the GST treatment totally reversed, the supplier would have to correct the error themselves under s 113A of the TAA if it was below the threshold or request the Commissioner amend the relevant assessment under s 113 of the TAA. However, there was uncertainty whether s 25 allowed the GST treatment of a supply to be reversed and the draft item was discontinued and referred to Inland Revenue’s Policy and Strategy group for consideration. Law: TAA ss 113, 113A  ¶32-075 Calculation of GST payable The Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 prescribes the method of calculating tax payable to (or refundable by) the Commissioner for a taxable period. Generally, tax payable or refundable is the total amount of “output tax” (tax on supplies made) less the total amount of “input tax” (tax on supplies received) and other allowable deductions and adjustments. If the result is positive GST is payable; if the result is negative the taxpayer should be entitled to a refund of GST. A deduction for input tax cannot be made unless the registered person holds a tax invoice, a debit note or a credit note for the supply. It is possible for a deduction for input tax to be claimed in a later period once the documentation is obtained and to the extent that a deduction has not previously been made. Normally, there is a two-year time limit to make an input tax deduction for a particular taxable period in a later period. See ¶32-021.  If a registered person’s return shows that the registered person neither owes GST nor is in a refund situation, the completed form must still be forwarded to Inland Revenue. Law: GST s 20  ¶32-078 Methods of accounting for GST Three methods are used to account for GST: ▪ the invoice (or accruals) basis ▪ the payments (or cash) basis, and ▪ the hybrid basis (input tax deducted on a payments basis and output tax accounted for on an invoice basis). The method adopted determines when output tax and input tax are taken into account for calculating tax payable. Invoice basis Generally, tax must be accounted for on an invoice basis. Application must be made to the Commissioner for adoption of the hybrid basis. Only certain persons are able to use the payments basis. Payments basis Eligibility to adopt the payments basis is limited to: ▪ non-profit bodies ▪ non-residents ▪ persons whose total value of taxable supplies (excluding GST) has not exceeded $2m in the preceding 12 months or is not likely to exceed $2m in the following 12 months, and ▪ persons who satisfy the Commissioner that it would be appropriate for them to use the payments basis because of the nature, volume and value of their taxable supplies and the nature of their accounting system.  Application to furnish GST returns on a payments basis should be made when applying to be registered. Upon receipt of application for registration, the Commissioner may direct a person to use the payments basis. The “value of supplies” made determines whether a person exceeds the $2m threshold. The $2m threshold is aggregated in the case of companies which are group registered and where branches and divisions are separately registered. A person who accounts for tax on a payments basis must give the Commissioner written notice within 21 days of ceasing to satisfy the relevant conditions. See s 53(1). Failure to so notify constitutes an absolute liability offence under s 143 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. If the Commissioner is satisfied that a registered person has ceased to satisfy the necessary conditions, whether or not on application by the registered person, the Commissioner is required to direct that the registered person account for GST payable on an invoice basis or, if the registered person requests, on a hybrid basis. A person cannot, however, be deemed to exceed the threshold criteria because of sales resulting from the scaling down or cessation of the taxable activity or the replacement of any plant or capital asset. It is mandatory for a non-resident person registered under s 54B to use the payments basis. Deferred settlements Taxpayers (other than certain non-profit bodies) who are registered for GST on a payments basis and who supply property for more than $225,000 (including GST) that is subject to a long settlement (ie more than one year) must account for GST on an invoice basis: s 19D. See also ¶32-280 and ¶32-500. Hybrid basis A registered person may make application to the Commissioner to account for GST on a hybrid basis (ie a person would deduct input tax on a payments basis and account for output tax on an invoice basis) if that person meets the payments basis requirements. Change in accounting basis  A person can apply to change from one accounting basis to another. A person using the hybrid or payments basis may make application to change to any of the three accounting bases: invoice, hybrid or payments (provided the payments basis requirements are met). It is within the Commissioner’s discretion to accept such an application. The Commissioner may initiate a change from the payments basis to an invoice basis if he is notified that the person has ceased to satisfy the eligibility criteria for the payments basis or if he is otherwise satisfied that this is the case. Briefly, when a taxpayer changes accounting basis, the taxpayer must furnish to the Commissioner, in the prescribed form: ▪ a list of creditors (change from invoice to hybrid or vice versa), or ▪ a list of debtors (change from payments to hybrid or vice versa), or ▪ a list of creditors and debtors (change from invoice to payments or vice versa), as at the last day of the taxable period immediately before that in which the new accounting basis takes effect. Also, a calculation must be made of the GST due as a result of the change in accounting basis. The calculation is made in accordance with the formula set out in s 19C. The particulars must be provided and any GST due paid to the Commissioner by the 28th day of the month following the end of the taxable period (or 15 January for 30 November taxable periods and 7 May for 31 March taxable periods). A taxpayer who has a change in accounting basis is also required to furnish a self-assessment of GST. Note that s 19(3B) provides that a liquidator, receiver or administrator of a registered person cannot apply to change the person’s accounting basis from a payments basis to an invoice basis.  Law: GST ss 19, 19A, 19B, 19C, 19D, 53(1); TAA s 143  ¶32-080 Significance of accounting method adopted for GST The accounting method adopted for GST will determine when output and input tax is taken into account for return purposes. If the invoice basis is used, tax is brought to account for the taxable period in which the supply is deemed to be made. In most instances, this will be the earlier of the time an invoice is issued and the time any payment is made. If an invoice is issued first, the person must account for tax in that taxable period even though the person may not have paid or received the relevant GST amount. If the payments basis is adopted, tax is generally brought to account only when, and to the extent that, payment is made. For example, if an invoice is issued for a supply in February, but payment is not made until July, tax will usually be accounted for in the taxable period applicable to the July payment. If the hybrid basis is used, output tax is brought to account on an invoice basis and input tax is accounted for on a payments basis. Consequently, output tax is brought to account for the return period in which the supply is deemed to be made. In most instances this will be the earlier of the time an invoice is issued or any payment is made. Input tax in general is brought to account only when and to the extent that payment is made.  ¶32-085 Selecting an accounting method for GST Those persons who are eligible to account for tax on a payments basis effectively have an option as to which accounting basis to adopt. In this regard, a person would generally tend towards use of the invoice basis if purchasing predominantly on credit. Here the person will receive an invoice for a supply but will not pay for the supply until later. Accordingly, the person may be entitled to deduct input tax before actually paying it. Conversely, it might be  disadvantageous to adopt the invoice basis if the person sells on credit. Here, the majority of sales require an invoice to be sent out, with resulting delays in payment. The person would be required to pay the Commissioner GST in the taxable period in which the invoice was issued but he or she might not be reimbursed for that cost for some time. If a payments basis was used, the person would generally not have to account for GST until he or she actually received payments. The hybrid basis of accounting should reduce any compliance costs associated with the requirement to maintain a creditor ledger to calculate input tax on an invoice basis. However, the adoption of a hybrid basis could result in cash-flow disadvantages. Under this basis the registered person is generally unable to claim input tax upon receipt of an invoice but is required to return output tax upon the issue of an invoice or any earlier receipt of payment. The extent to which a person purchases on a credit basis and sells on a credit basis is, therefore, a significant factor in the selection of which accounting basis to adopt for GST purposes. A further factor to consider when deciding which accounting basis to adopt is the level of late filing penalties that might be imposed if returns are filed late more than once in any 12-month period. Taxpayers on an invoice and hybrid basis pay higher penalties. For further discussion see ¶32-223.  ¶32-088 GST apportionment rules for mixed use of goods and services Background The change-in-use adjustment provisions that deal with the mixed use of goods and services have been replaced with an approach that reflects their relative use and apportions related input tax deductions. The reform of the principal purpose test for input tax required a corresponding change in the adjustment provisions. The apportionment rules apply where goods or services are used for a mix of private/exempt and business purposes. Section 20 contains  apportionment rules for calculating amounts of tax payable. Sections 21–21H provide detailed provisions for making adjustments under the apportionment rules, including transitional provisions. Inland Revenue (IR) has provided a comprehensive example of the operation of the apportionment rules in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 34. Adjustments for goods and services acquired before 1 April 2011 Section 21H is a transitional provision that specifies which rules — the former change-in-use adjustment rules or the apportionment rules — should be used for goods and services acquired before the date of introduction of the apportionment rules on 1 April 2011. Generally, goods or services acquired before 1 April 2011 continued to apply the former change-in-use adjustment rules, subject to the “sunset” concessions that prevented adjustments being made after a certain date (the latest being 1 April 2016). The exception to the general rule is when no adjustment was made or was required to be made under the former change-in-use adjustment rules before 1 April 2011 for goods or services other than those referred to in s 21HB (transitional rule relating to the treatment of dwellings). In that case, if input tax was deducted or supplies were zero-rated at the time of purchase, the former change-in-use adjustment rules applied to the supplies. If a person has not deducted any input tax for the goods or services, they should apply the apportionment rules. See s 21H(2B). If applying the apportionment rules, the first adjustment period is treated as starting on the date of acquisition of the goods or services and ending on the first balance date falling after the later of the date they were first used for making taxable supplies and the date the person became a registered person (s 21H(2C)). Subsections 21H(2B) and (2C) were introduced with retrospective effect to 1 April 2011. However, a savings provision allowed taxpayers who had already applied either the former change-in-use adjustment rules or the apportionment rules before the amendments were introduced on 14 September 2011 to continue with their chosen treatment.  Apportionment at the time of acquisition — s 20(3C)–(3JB) The apportionment required at the time of acquisition is fully discussed at ¶32-022. In brief, a GST-registered person may claim an input tax deduction on acquisition of goods and services based on the extent to which the goods or services are intended to be used or are available to be used in making taxable supplies. See s 20(3C). The rules attempt to achieve as much accuracy as possible at acquisition by requiring taxpayers to make fair and reasonable estimates on the intended taxable and non-taxable uses of goods and services acquired. There are also special rules for associated parties, land, financial services providers, non-profit bodies, registered non-residents and mixed-use assets under the Income Tax Act 2007. However, taxpayers might have to make further adjustments in later periods if the actual taxable use subsequently varies from the intended taxable use. Alternative methods Certain businesses may apply alternative methods of apportioning and making adjustments to input tax deductions. This is intended to address the high compliance costs that some businesses, such as retirement villages, have experienced in applying the apportionment and later adjustment approach previously legislated. Sections 20(3EB) and 21(4B) allow a registered person to use an agreed alternative method of apportionment and adjustment. The method is required to have regard to the tenor of the apportionment and adjustment rules in s 20(3C), (3D) and (3G) to (3M). For example, there may be a change in the timing of a deduction, and it would be expected that the agreed approach would take account of the time value-of-money (eg by reducing the deduction slightly to reflect this advantage). Two groups may agree an alternative method with the Commissioner: ▪ businesses with a turnover exceeding or expected to exceed $24m in a 12-month period, and  ▪ industry associations. Businesses exceeding the turnover threshold will agree a method with the Commissioner for their own activities. Industry associations will agree methods that could be applied by persons in that industry. The Commissioner and the association will have to agree the persons or class of persons that are eligible to apply the method. While a list of factors that an agreed method must take into account is not provided, Inland Revenue expects agreements would usually contain information such as the following (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 78): ▪ all relevant business activities of the applicant ▪ the methodology proposed (for example, calculation based on turnover, floor space, time spent, number of transactions or cost allocations) ▪ an explanation of why the proposed methodology is fair and reasonable, and how it reflects the outcomes that could be reached under the apportionment rules ▪ categories of costs that can be directly attributed to either taxable or non-taxable supplies, and categories of costs that relate to both taxable and non-taxable supplies ▪ the methodology proposed for significant one-off acquisitions such as land ▪ the method by which disposals of assets will be dealt with (for example, what input tax adjustments will be made) ▪ any adjustments that will be made in relation to goods and services that have already been acquired, including those that are subject to the current apportionment rules, transitional rules or old apportionment rules  ▪ details of any proposed variations to the minimum number of adjustment periods for which adjustments will be made, and ▪ details of any proposed variations to the period in which adjustments will be returned. Annual adjustments required — ss 21(1)–(3), 21A On an annual basis, a registered person must identify and compare the percentage actual taxable use of the goods and services with the intended use or previous actual use. If a percentage difference arises, an adjustment for the difference must be made. See ss 21(1) and 21A. Adjustments are required to be made at the end of an adjustment period if the (GST-exclusive) value of the goods or services is more than $5,000: s 21(2), (3). An adjustment for such commodities is only required if: (i) the difference between the intended use on acquisition and the actual percentage use for the relevant adjustment period is 10 percentage points or more, or is a lesser percentage and the resulting adjustment is more than $1,000, or (ii) (if paragraph (i) has previously been actioned) the difference between the use calculated when making an earlier adjustment and the actual use for the present adjustment period is 10 percentage points or more, or is a lesser percentage and the resulting adjustment is more than $1,000. No adjustment is permitted in other circumstances. For example, no adjustment can be made where the value of the pertinent goods or services is $5,000 or less (GST exclusive). Similarly, if the change in use is both less than a 10 percentage point variance and amounts to a $1,000 or less adjustment. The “percentage point” reference means the difference between the two percentage figures. For example, if the intended figure was 45% but the actual use proves to be 56%, then the “percentage point” difference is 11%.  The adjustment is calculated as a percentage of what would have been a full input tax credit. Two straightforward examples best illustrate this proposition. Example 1: A GST-registered person purchases an item for $133,334 plus $20,000 GST. The intended use is 75% taxable/25% non-taxable. Input tax deducted on acquisition is therefore $15,000 ($20,000 × 75%). Actual use for the first adjustment period is 60%. The adjustment calculation is: 75% − 60% = 15% lesser taxable use × $20,000 = $3,000. The $3,000 is therefore the output tax adjustment for the GST return period.  Example 2: As per example 1 above, but the actual use for the first adjustment period is 82%. The adjustment calculation is: 75% − 82% = 7% increased taxable use × $20,000 = $1,400. The increased taxable use therefore generates a $1,400 deduction adjustment to be included in the GST return for the adjustment period.  Section 21(2)(ab) also prevents a non-resident from making an adjustment when they incur GST under s 12(1) on the importation of goods and then subsequently re-export the goods. This allows the non-resident to retain the claimed input tax credit. Frequency — ss 21A(b), 21C, 21G(3) The adjustment must be ascertained and calculated annually. The first calculation is to be made either on the first or second income tax balance date following acquisition (at the choice of the registered person). For example, where a person has a 31 March balance date and purchases an item in April 2012, the adjustment calculation can be made for the GST return for either March 2013 or March 2014 at the person’s option.  The calculation exercise must be repeated for each subsequent income tax balance date to ascertain if the 10%/$1,000 thresholds are breached. If a percentage difference arises and the exemptions in s 21(2)(c) do not apply, an adjustment must be made for any percentage difference. The calculation is made as at the last day of the relevant adjustment period. In the event that a person alters their income tax balance date, the GST adjustment period is correspondingly adjusted. However, if that has the effect of shortening the period to less than 12 months, then the adjustment period is extended to the balance date of the following year (s 21G(3)). Number of adjustments — s 21G(4) There is a limit on the number of adjustments. However, the limit does not apply to land, that is, land is subject to ongoing adjustments for the entire period of ownership. The limit for other commodities is either: (a) one of the following based on the (GST-exclusive) value of the commodity: (i) two adjustment periods for commodities valued at more than $5,000 but not more than $10,000 (ii) five adjustment periods for commodities valued at more than $10,000 but not more than $500,000 (iii) ten adjustment periods for commodities valued at more than $500,000, or (b) the number of years of the estimated useful life of the asset for income tax depreciation purposes (as per the Tax Depreciation Rates Determinations issued by IR). A person can choose either method (a) or (b). However, once they have chosen a method, they cannot subsequently change it. A final adjustment is to be effected when the commodity is disposed of (or  is treated as having been disposed of). See below at “Treatment on disposal”. Section 21G(4) sets out the maximum number of adjustment periods required for apportioning input tax. Section 21G(7B) clarifies that a person must make a final apportionment of input tax when goods or services are disposed of during an adjustment period. The current adjustment period is treated as the final adjustment period ending immediately before the date of disposal. Treatment on disposal — s 21F This section provides that if a registered person disposes of, or is treated as disposing of, goods or services in the course of a taxable activity and has not claimed a full deduction, they may be able to claim an additional amount. The broad effect is to allow a final adjustment to be calculated as a percentage of the consideration received for the supply made by the registered person (rather than the consideration paid by that person when they acquired the commodity). This is consistent with the taxable status (and possible output tax impost) of the supply made by the GST-registered person. The formula for calculating the final adjustment is: tax fraction × consideration × (1 − actual deduction/full input tax deduction) See s 21F(2) and example below. Example 3: A GST-registered person purchases an item for $133,334 plus $20,000 GST. The intended use is 75% taxable/25% non-taxable. Input tax deducted on acquisition is therefore $15,000 ($20,000 × 75%). Actual use for the first adjustment period is 60%. That means a percentage use difference of 15%. Adjustment required for the first period is 15% × $20,000 = $3,000 (output tax adjustment).  The actual use stays at 60% until the item is sold 15 years later for $10,000 plus $1,500 GST. 3/23 × 11,500 × 0.4 (1 − (12,000 divided by 20,000)) = 600 The registered person therefore claims a final adjustment deduction of $600, while accounting for $1,500 output tax.  Cumulative deductions cannot exceed the amount of the full input tax deduction. That is, in the case of an appreciating asset, the total of all credits (amount of input tax claimed plus subsequent adjustments including the final adjustment) is capped at the quantum of the original full input tax. “Wash-up” calculation — s 21FB Section 21FB requires taxpayers who have applied the apportionment rules to perform a “wash-up” calculation when their use of an asset changes to 100% taxable or 100% non-taxable. Taxpayers that change from mixed use to 100% taxable use of an asset can claim the “full input tax deduction” (the total amount of input tax on the supply, after taking into account any nominal GST component chargeable under s 20(3J)(a)(i)) less the “actual deduction” (the amount of deduction already claimed, taking into account adjustments made up to the end of the adjustment period following the period in which the use was changed). Taxpayers that change from mixed use to 100% non-taxable use of an asset are required to pay output tax equal to the “actual deduction” already claimed. Once the wash-up calculation has been performed, taxpayers are no longer required to make any ongoing adjustments. To qualify for the wash-up deduction, the taxpayer will need to sustain the 100% taxable or non-taxable use of their asset for the remainder of the adjustment period in which the use changed and the next adjustment period (up to two years). The wash-up calculation is done at the end of the second adjustment period. Example 4:  John purchases a building that is used 50% for commercial use and 50% as residential apartments. On the basis that the apartments will be leased as dwellings, an input tax deduction of 50% is taken at the time of purchase. After two years, John gives notice to his tenants and signs an agreement with a management company that will operate the apartments as serviced apartments for business travellers. Serviced apartments are commercial dwellings so the building is now being used solely for making taxable supplies. If the apartments continue to be used solely for making taxable supplies for the remainder of the adjustment period and for the following adjustment period, the balance of the unclaimed input tax deduction can be claimed taking into account any adjustments made leading up to the second adjustment period after the change in use. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 101.  Concurrent uses of land — s 21E A special rule deals with situations when a registered person simultaneously uses the same area of land during an adjustment period for making concurrent taxable and non-taxable supplies, such as when land is simultaneously advertised for sale (taxable use) and rented out as a dwelling (non-taxable use). Section 21E provides formulas to enable taxpayers to calculate the extent to which land is used for making taxable supplies. The taxable supply formula will apply only for the purposes of taking into account exempt or non-taxable supplies. If the market value of land is not readily ascertainable, a person can use other fair and reasonable methods to provide a reasonable approximation of the market value of the land, see s 21E(6). Where land is used at any time solely for making non-taxable supplies (ie it is removed from sale and permanently rented out as a dwelling) the additional formula in s 21E(7) must be applied. Section 21E does not apply if the Commissioner agrees that the registered person may use another calculation method. For worked examples of the formulas contained in s 21E, refer to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 38. Transitional rule for dwellings — s 21HB  Due to the changes to the definitions of “dwelling” and “commercial dwelling” some goods or services were treated from 1 April 2011 as being used for making taxable supplies where previously they were exempt. Examples include some farmstays, homestays and bed-andbreakfast establishments. If the person was GST registered a one-off adjustment could be made. The person had to treat the goods and services as acquired on 1 April 2011 at the original cost of the supply. The adjustment was reduced by the amount of any input tax claimed under the old apportionment rules. Note that the rule only applied to accommodation acquired after the introduction of GST on 1 October 1986. Note also that suppliers affected by the 2011 changes to the definitions of “commercial dwelling” and “dwelling” had the option of not treating the supply of accommodation in a newly defined commercial dwelling as a taxable supply. This option was not available if the total value of supplies of accommodation in the newly defined commercial dwelling exceeded the $60,000 registration threshold in s 51. This option only applied to newly defined commercial dwellings that were acquired before 1 April 2011. The transitional rule was amended retrospectively to clarify that it also applied when a property that was previously treated as a dwelling no longer fit into either the definition of “dwelling” or “commercial dwelling” as a result of the changes. Adjustments when person becomes GST registered after acquiring goods and services — ss 3A(3C), 21B This section allows a person who registers for GST to claim input tax for goods or services they had acquired before they became GST registered. The input tax deduction that can be claimed may take into account any previous non-taxable use. The person must either provide a tax invoice for the supply or have adequate records. For a worked example refer to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 42.  For a supply of goods and services that have been acquired from an associated person, s 3A(3C) provides that the amount of input tax must not be more than the amount accounted for as output tax by the associated supplier of the goods and services. Section 21B(1)(a) allows a registered person to claim input tax deductions for imported and/or secondhand goods acquired before registration that are later used as part of their taxable activity. This deduction is available when the person has paid GST on the goods and services under s 8(1) or on the import of goods under s 12(1). Both deductions are limited to the “tax charged”, being the tax actually paid by the person when they acquired the goods and services. If the goods and services were acquired when the GST rate was 12.5%, GST at that rate will determine the maximum deduction they can claim. See also s 21B(5) and ¶32-056. Note that as a result of changes made to the GST treatment of bodies corporate (see ¶32-148), s 21B has been amended to ensure that a unit title body corporate that registers for GST will not be able to make an adjustment under s 21B for goods and services acquired before registration. Law: GST ss 20(3C), (3D), (3EB), 21–21H  ¶32-089 GST adjustments for mixed-use assets under the Income Tax Act 2007 Subpart DG of the Income Tax Act 2007 deals with certain mixeduse assets (see ¶10-035). These are assets that are partly used for business purposes, partly used for private purposes and partly unused during an income year. The rules apply to land, including buildings, boats and aircraft, although only boats and aircraft with a cost of $50,000 or more are included. The rules deal with the apportionment of deductions for expenditure incurred on these mixed-use assets. Where an asset is unused for part of a period, the difficulty is whether expenditure incurred during that period relates to the income-earning or private use of the asset. For example, for a holiday home that is rented out part of the time, used by the owners  for part of the time and left vacant part of the time, how should expenditure incurred during the time the home is vacant and general repairs and maintenance expenditure be treated. The same issue arises for GST for apportioning between taxable and non-taxable use in these circumstances. Changes have therefore been made to the GST Act consistent with those made in the Income Tax Act for mixed-use assets. These changes ensure that asset owners that are registered for GST are able to claim input tax deductions in a similar way as they would be able to claim income tax deductions for the same item. The adjustment on acquisition is dealt with under ss 20(3JB)(a) and 20G and is discussed at ¶32-022. Sections 20(3JB) (b) and 20G require adjustments to be made in later periods for any subsequent change of use. Some GST-specific rules cater for the fact that: ▪ GST has always recognised that supplies can be made for below-market value to non-associates ▪ an asset will have a GST component that will need to be apportioned over the ownership period (whereas for income tax purposes this would be capital expenditure) ▪ some items of expenditure relevant for the income tax calculation are not relevant for GST (such as interest), and ▪ GST is not calculated on an annual basis. Owners of mixed-use assets are required to apportion their input deductions in a way that reflects their relative taxable and nontaxable use of the asset. The formula used for calculating GST deductions in s 20G incorporates the income tax definitions as far as possible (in an attempt to keep the compliance costs down). The main differences between the income tax and GST definitions relate to: ▪ the treatment of supplies for less than market value, and ▪ what constitutes “expenditure”.  These differences reflect the different nature of the two taxes. The GST formula replaces “expenditure” with “input tax”. Note that for the purposes of s 20G, a registered person does not include a widely-held company — s 20G(8). A “widely-held company” is defined in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act as a company that, at the time, has no less than 25 shareholders (treating all associated shareholders as one person), and is not a closely-held company. Link with apportionment rules The apportionment rules (see ¶32-088) require registered persons to apportion input tax in accordance with the taxable and non-taxable use of the supply. As mixed-use assets are also used partly for private and partly for business purposes, the apportionment rules also apply to expenditure on these assets. To this end, the definitions used in the apportionment rules — “percentage intended use”, “percentage actual use”, “percentage difference” and “previous actual use” — have been extended to apply to the mixed-use asset formula in s 20G. Section 20G apportions input tax on expenditure that a person incurs in the use of an asset to which s DG 3 of the Income Tax Act applies. The formula apportions input tax deductions based on the proportion of income-earning days in the GST period relative to the total number of days in the period that the asset is in active use. As with the general apportionment rules and the formula used for income tax, s 20G requires a registered person to perform annual calculations to determine the level to which they can claim input tax deductions. Section 20G then requires the registered person to pay any output tax or claim input tax on any positive or negative adjustment produced by the formula. As with the income tax rules, no apportionment is required for input tax that relates solely to the taxable use of an asset and no deduction is available for amounts that relate solely to the nontaxable use of the asset. Applying the new formula  One issue specific to GST is that GST is not generally calculated on an annual basis. GST-registered owners of mixed-use assets are therefore required to file returns on a monthly, two-monthly or sixmonthly basis. The total income-earning days referred to in the formula in s 20G is the total number of days in the period on which the person supplies the asset for use and derives consideration for the supply, whether at, above or below market value, including days on which: ▪ the asset is used to derive income for a particular period and the asset is used during the period solely in the ordinary course of business ▪ the asset is being repaired for damage incurred while used to earn income ▪ the asset is relocated to earn income and the amount derived from the use of the asset includes an amount payable for the cost of relocation ▪ the asset has become unavailable for use because another person who had earlier reserved the asset for their own use subsequently did not take advantage of that reservation, or ▪ a fringe benefit tax liability arises. Sections 20(3JB)(b) and 20G require a person to perform the calculation at the end of an adjustment period, as defined. This is usually an annual period. However, the rules require the registered person to estimate their taxable use of a supply in the intervening periods and calculate their actual taxable use at the end of each adjustment period. This requires a comparison between the level of anticipated private use of an asset and the actual private use over an adjustment period: s 20G(5). This wash-up calculation determines the person’s true tax position for each of the taxable periods within the adjustment period.  To ease the compliance burden on registered persons, the rules require input tax in the adjustment to be aggregated. Only if the estimate deductions are 10 percentage points or greater than the actual taxable use (or less than 10 percentage points but more than $1,000) is a wash-up necessary: s 20G(6). An alternative approach, which ensures greater accuracy but might reduce cash flow, would be for the registered person to delay claiming input deductions in the intervening periods and instead claim their annual entitlement at the end of each adjustment period when the calculation is performed. (Section 20(3) allows deductions from output tax to be claimed any time up to the second anniversary of the relevant supply.) Disposal Section 20G(7) provides that ss 8 and 21F apply and the disposal of the relevant asset by a registered person will be a taxable supply. This means that output tax will be payable on the disposal and a registered person will be able to apply the s 21F formula to claim additional input tax. Law: GST s 20G; IT07 subpart DG  TAXABLE PERIODS ¶32-090 Types of taxable periods for GST GST legislation is based on the principle of voluntary compliance. This means, among other things, that registered persons are themselves responsible for filing GST returns, without any request from Inland Revenue (IR). Returns should be filed with IR at regular intervals. The period covered in the return is called the taxable period and it may be: ▪ two-monthly period ▪ six-monthly period, or  ▪ one-monthly period. Normally, the last day of a month is the end of a taxable period. However, a registered person may apply to IR to have a day other than the last day of the month as the end of its taxable period. The day chosen must be within seven days either side of the last day of the month. A change in the end date of the taxable period does not affect the due date for the filing of returns. All GST-registered taxpayers who are liable for provisional tax must have their GST taxable period aligned with their income tax balance date. For example, a provisional taxpayer with a 31 March income tax balance date must have a GST taxable period that ends on 31 March. Any subsequent change of income tax balance date also necessitates a realignment of GST taxable period. See further at ¶22-115 and s 15B. Note that from 1 October 2016, GST applies to the supply of remote services by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand-resident consumers. Between 1 October 2016 and 31 March 2017, a nonresident supplier of remote services that were taxed under the new rules had a default taxable period of six months, with the option of a two-monthly taxable period. From 1 April 2017, these suppliers have calendar quarterly taxable periods. See ¶32-067. From 1 December 2019, GST applies to the supply of distantly taxable goods by non-resident suppliers to New Zealand-resident consumers. These suppliers have calendar quarterly taxable periods, with the exception of a four-month period from 1 December 2019 to 31 March 2020. See ¶32-064. Law: GST ss 15, 15B, 15E  ¶32-100 Two-monthly taxable period for GST A registered person has a two-monthly taxable period unless application for another taxable period is made or the value of taxable supplies exceeds (or is likely to exceed) $24m.  A person can elect to have a two-month period ending in either odd or even months providing this aligns with their income tax balance date. A person may apply for a change in taxable period in a way acceptable to the Commissioner. Law: GST ss 15(1)(b), 15B(1), 15C  ¶32-110 Six-monthly taxable period for GST A registered person may apply to the Commissioner in writing to have a six-monthly taxable period if: ▪ the total value of taxable supplies (excluding GST) at the end of a 12-month period has not exceeded $500,000, or ▪ the total value (excluding GST) is unlikely to exceed that amount over a 12-month period. If a person is registered for GST and is liable for provisional tax, the taxable period must align with their balance date and they must pay their GST and provisional tax on the same day. Before 30 March 2017, the Commissioner had a discretion to allow taxpayers to file six-monthly. Registered persons had to apply in a way acceptable to the Commissioner, who would take into account the following factors in making a decision: ▪ the person’s history of filing and paying tax ▪ the person’s financial reporting practices ▪ whether the person has been placed within a six-month cycle before, and ▪ the nature and volume of the person’s taxable supplies. Seasonal supplies  With effect from 30 March 2017, the Commissioner’s discretion has been replaced with a more objective test relating to seasonal supplies. The new test provides that a person may apply for a sixmonth taxable period regardless of their level of taxable supplies if the person makes 80% or more of the person’s taxable supplies for an income year during a period of six months or less that ends with, or less than one month before, the end of the income year, and they have not had a six-month taxable period under this test in the 24month period before the application. If a registered person has a six-monthly taxable period and their turnover exceeds the $500,000 limit, the person must advise the Commissioner in writing within 21 days: s 53(1). It is an absolute liability offence under s 143 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 for that person to fail to notify the Commissioner. Accordingly, there is an ongoing need to monitor the total value of supplies made in the preceding 12 months. Special attention should be paid to a business with a rapid growth pattern or where turnover is subject to seasonal low-volume/high-value cashflow peaks. No person will cease to satisfy the criteria where the value of supplies exceeds the threshold because of: ▪ the cessation of, or reduction in the scale of, the supplier’s business, or ▪ the replacement of any plant or capital assets used in the supplier’s business. Also with effect from 30 March 2017, changes to s 15C(2) clarify that a person must change their taxable period from a six-month period when they exceed the threshold for six-monthly filing and the new exception for seasonal businesses does not apply. The person must change at the end of the next taxable period ending on or after the end of the 12-month period when they do not satisfy the criteria. A new “one-off” exception in s 15C(2B) relieves a person from the requirement to change their taxable period where they are likely to not exceed the threshold in the following taxable period. However,  for this exception to apply, the person must not have relied on the exception in the immediately preceding 12-month period. Standard practice statement Inland Revenue has released standard practice statement, SPS 17/02, “Six-monthly GST return filing”, which applies from 4 October 2017 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 11, December 2017 at 2). The SPS discusses the new seasonal supplies criteria and the breach of threshold criteria, and it includes a number of examples to illustrate when the criteria apply. Law: GST ss 15(1)(a), (2), (5), 15B(1), 15C, 53(1); TAA s 143  ¶32-120 Monthly taxable period for GST Any registered person may apply to have a monthly taxable period. The Commissioner is required to grant such an application. Any registered person whose total value of taxable supplies has in the preceding 12 months exceeded $24m, or is likely to do so in the next 12 months, is required to be on a monthly cycle. A registered person is obliged to advise the Commissioner within 21 days when their taxable supplies are at the threshold level. It is an absolute liability offence under s 143 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 for that person to fail to notify the Commissioner. Accordingly, there is an ongoing need to monitor the total value of supplies in the preceding 12 months. The Commissioner will not direct that a person change from a monthly cycle unless that person applies for a change of taxable period. Note that on 6 June 2020, the Commissioner released a COVID-19 determination, COV 20/03, “Variation of the application of s 15D(2) Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 to extend time to make an application to change GST taxable period” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 5). Section 15(3) allows a person to apply to the Commissioner to have a one-month taxable period for GST. Under s 15D(2), the change in taxable period takes effect at the end of the taxable period in which the person applies. For a person who had a six-month taxable period  ending 31 March 2020 but who did not apply to change to a onemonth taxable period before 31 March 2020, the time for making that application was extended to 30 June 2020 using s 6I of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This meant that an election made before 30 June 2020 to change from a six-month taxable period to a onemonth taxable period would take effect from 1 April 2020. This variation was subject to the following conditions: ▪ the person notified the Commissioner before 30 June 2020 that they wished their election to have this effect, and ▪ the person did not subsequently elect to change from a onemonth taxable period before 30 September 2020. ▸ Note: On 4 November 2020, the Commissioner released a further COVID-19 determination, COV 20/11, “Variation of section 15D(2) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 for applications to change GST taxable period” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 11, December 2020 at 6). This variation provides that where a person applies to change from a six-month taxable period to a one-month taxable period, the change will take effect from the beginning of the six-month period in which the person applies (rather than at the end). COV 20/11 applies for a six-month taxable period commencing between 1 April 2020 and 31 March 2021. The person must notify the Commissioner before 31 March 2021 and they must not elect to change back from a one-month taxable period before 30 September 2021. The impacts of COVID-19 must have materially affected the person’s ability to make the election earlier and they must expect that applying the variation will materially assist the sustainability of their business. Law: GST ss 15(1)(c), (3), (4), 15C(3C), (4), 15D(2), 53(1)  ¶32-130 Death, liquidation, receivership or bankruptcy for GST For the purposes of filing GST returns and paying GST, the date when any registered person dies, or goes into liquidation or  receivership, or becomes bankrupt, is deemed to be the last day of that person’s taxable period. This means that a return up to the deemed last day and a return to cover the period from the day after death or insolvency until the end of the usual taxable period will be furnished to cover the taxable period in which any of the abovementioned events occurs. Both returns and payment of GST are due on the normal due date. Liability People who carry on taxable activities in their capacity as personal representatives, liquidators or receivers of an incapacitated person are specified agents. Section 58(1A) deems such specified agents to be registered persons carrying on the incapacitated person’s taxable activity. In effect, this imposes personal liability for GST on the specified agents. The specified agent is not personally liable for liabilities incurred by the incapacitated person before death or incapacity: s 58(1D). The specified agent may, however, file outstanding returns and claim input tax credits for the pre-agency period. This claim is subject to the Commissioner’s right of set-off for unpaid tax and GST of the incapacitated person: s 58(1C). Specified agents must notify Inland Revenue (IR) that they are carrying on the taxable activity and the circumstances that gave rise to their carrying on the taxable activity. IR will keep a record of the start of the agency period. The GST registration number will be the same as for the incapacitated person. For discussion on GST issues arising on the death of a partner, see ¶23-115. Law: GST ss 15E(3), (4), 58  ¶32-145 Selecting a taxable period for GST A registered person should give careful consideration to whether he or she wishes to adopt a taxable period other than a two-monthly taxable period. The obvious cost advantage of filing six-monthly GST  returns, rather than two-monthly returns, suggests that many smaller traders will seek this basis of accounting. There may also be a cash flow benefit for traders who have to pay tax to the Commissioner (rather than receive a refund) in receiving GST from a customer towards the commencement of a taxable period and only accounting to Inland Revenue (IR) for that payment at the end of that period. In spite of the increased costs of filing monthly returns, it would appear to be to the advantage of some registered persons to opt for monthly filing. Persons in a net GST credit situation with IR (ie persons who have paid more GST to their suppliers than that received from their customers) will be advantaged by a shorter return period. Exporters provide the obvious example of businesses that would benefit from being on a monthly cycle. Other persons who make a proportionately large number of zero-rated supplies would also benefit. Example: Exported goods are zero rated, so that an exporter may not collect GST on goods sold to an overseas customer. However, if the exporter has purchased materials in New Zealand that were subject to GST, he or she will be entitled to recover the amounts of GST paid from IR. Having paid GST on the purchase of materials without having collected GST from its customer, the exporter will be in a net credit situation with IR. It would appear to be to the exporter's advantage to recover the GST component of its business purchases from IR as soon as possible after the payment to its supplier.  TAXPAYER’S OBLIGATIONS ¶32-148 Registration for GST A person is liable to register if, in the course of all taxable activities: ▪ at the end of any month, the value of supplies made in New Zealand during that month and the preceding 11 months exceeds the $60,000 registration threshold, or  ▪ at the commencement of any month, there are reasonable grounds for believing that the value of supplies made in New Zealand during that month and the following 11 months will exceed the $60,000 threshold. The $60,000 threshold for registration is calculated with reference to the value of supply rules. If, for example, a person is not registered for GST but leases a farm property to an associate and the market rental for the lease exceeds the threshold, the value of supply will be the market rental and the lessor will be deemed to be registered for GST. See Case T12 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,070 and Case U1 (1999) 19 NZTC 9,001. See also The Trustee, Executors and Agency Co New Zealand Ltd v C of IR (1997) 18 NZTC 13,076 (HC). Not required to register A person is not required to register if: ▪ that person can convince the Commissioner that, at the commencement of any month, the value of supplies to be made in the 12 months then following will not exceed the threshold, or ▪ the value of supplies exceeds the threshold solely because of: □ the scaling down, or cessation, of business (s 51(1)(c)), or □ the replacement of any plant or capital asset (s 51(1)(d)), or □ the supply of certain telecommunications services to persons who are non-residents but physically present in New Zealand (s 51(1)(e)). An unregistered person must therefore evaluate his or her position at the end of each month. Anyone who is liable to be registered and fails to do so within 21 days of becoming liable commits an offence under s 143 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Factors to remember when calculating the threshold are: ▪ the value of supplies excludes GST  ▪ the value of exempt supplies is not to be taken into account (because exempt supplies are not part of a taxable activity), and ▪ the value of supplies made in the course of all taxable activities carried on by the supplier is to be taken into account. For example, a trader exceeds the threshold if carrying on one taxable activity with supplies of $50,000 per annum and a second taxable activity with supplies of $15,000 pa. A special statutory rule applies where two or more companies amalgamate. Here, for the purposes of calculating the registration threshold, the merged (ie amalgamated) company is deemed to have the combined turnover of all of the companies as at the date of amalgamation. Voluntary registration A person carrying on a taxable activity, or intending to carry on a taxable activity from a specific date, can register for GST on a voluntary basis even if the total value of supplies made do not exceed the $60,000 threshold. Early registration A person who intends to register should do so at an early stage when that person starts up a business (the person can claim back GST paid on initial inputs) or that person purchases a business from a registered person (a registered person will pay 0% tax if the business is a going concern whereas an unregistered purchaser will pay GST at the standard rate). Effective date of registration Where a person is liable to be registered for GST because the registration threshold is expected to be exceeded and the person applies to be registered, the Commissioner has complete discretion as to the effective date of that registration. Generally, the Commissioner will make the date effective from when the person first became liable to register for GST. However, where a person fails to apply, the Commissioner must register the person from the date that the person first became liable to be registered, although she also  has the discretion to register a person from such later date as is considered equitable, having regard to the circumstances of the case. In practice, this discretion is rarely exercised. In the case of voluntary registration, the Commissioner will generally select the date on which she became satisfied that the person was able to be registered for GST. In exceptional circumstances, the Commissioner may approve registering the person from a date in the past. In standard practice statement, SPS 18/03, “Effective date of GST registrations”, released by Inland Revenue in August 2018 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 8, September 2018 at 15), the Commissioner identifies the following as factors that will be considered to determine whether a retrospective GST registration would be approved: ▪ The reason why the applicant did not voluntarily register earlier. Persuasive circumstances include absence overseas, illness, or personal tragedy. ▪ Whether the applicant proceeded in business in the genuine belief that they were ineligible to be registered. ▪ Whether the applicant proceeded in business on the reasonable belief that the registration is automatic. ▪ The applicant’s ability to verify the amount of output tax payable on the supplies made during that period. ▪ The compliance cost difference between allowing a retrospective date and allowing a current date. This applies for both the Commissioner and the applicant. ▪ The amount of time between the date of application and the requested registration date. The longer the time between the application date and the requested retrospective registration date, the less likely that the Commissioner will exercise the discretion.  ▪ The effect that a backdated registration would have on the administration of the Act. This includes consideration of the effect the backdated registration would have on other persons, including suppliers and recipients. This is particularly relevant for land transactions involving another GST-registered party. The Commissioner would need to be satisfied that both parties to a land transaction were treating that transaction consistently in terms of the zero-rating provisions in s 11(1)(mb). The list is not exhaustive and there may be other factors relevant to the particular applicant’s circumstances. Where the Commissioner backdates the registration, the person must account for GST from the date the person is registered. From the registration date, the applicant will be able to claim input tax deductions for goods acquired for use in making taxable supplies for that period, provided that the relevant tax invoices have been retained. Effect of registration  A registered person must account to the Commissioner for GST charged on supplies made, may claim a credit for input tax and other deductions and must make GST returns and pay any net GST amount to the Commissioner at either monthly, two-monthly, or sixmonthly intervals. Other consequences of registration are that a registered person can be required to issue tax invoices and credit and debit notes, may be assessed for tax payable and can object to certain decisions of the Commissioner and to assessments. Also, a registered person is liable to pay interest and late payment penalties if GST is not paid by the due date. He or she must keep full and appropriate records establishing that person’s liability for the tax and is to advise the Commissioner of certain events, ie give notice to the Commissioner within 21 days of any change of address or ceasing to carry on a taxable activity. Cancellation of registration does not relieve a registered person of the obligation to meet pertinent GST responsibilities. Special status registration Special registration principles apply to the following individuals and groups: ▪ groups of companies ▪ groups of persons ▪ branches and divisions of a registered person ▪ unincorporated bodies, partnerships, joint ventures and trusts, and ▪ personal representatives, liquidators, receivers and mortgagees in possession. See ss 55–58 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 and ¶32-130, ¶23-110 and ¶23-115. ▸ Note: In February 2019, Inland Revenue released an issues paper, IRRUIP 13, “Consequences of GST group registration”. The GST group registration rules allow a group of related entities to be treated  as a single entity for GST purposes. Once the entities are grouped, a representative member is responsible for most compliance matters and is deemed to carry on all the taxable activities of the group members. Supplies made or received by a group member are treated as made or received by the representative member. Taxable supplies between group members may be ignored. In this way, the Act creates a statutory fiction — something is treated as having been done by one person (the representative member), when in fact it has been done by another (the group member). The issues paper acknowledges that views differ about the extent of this statutory fiction. One view is that by deeming the representative member to make a group member’s supply, the supply is still treated as “made” by the group member and simply attributed to the representative member. This view interprets the statutory fiction in a narrow way (the narrow interpretation). Another view is that by deeming the representative member to make a group member’s supply, the supply is treated as “made” by the representative member. This view interprets the statutory fiction in a wider way (the wide interpretation). In most cases, the consequences are the same under either interpretive approach. However, sometimes the consequences differ. This might occur, for example, where a non-resident or nonregistered entity is in the group. The issues paper sets out both the narrow and wide interpretative approaches and identifies cases where the GST outcome differs depending on the approach applied. It is intended that a draft public statement will be issued for consultation in due course, but the issues are currently being considered by Inland Revenue’s Policy and Strategy group. Registration for non-residents With effect from 1 April 2014, non-residents that are not making taxable supplies in New Zealand may be able to register under s 54B. Before that date, non-resident businesses that were not carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand still bore New Zealand GST as an economic cost of doing business. Section 54B allows  non-resident businesses to register and claim input tax deductions in broadly the same manner as comparable New Zealand businesses. For a non-resident person to be registered under s 54B, the Commissioner must be satisfied that the person is not liable to be registered under the ordinary registration rules and that: ▪ the person is registered for a consumption tax in the territory in which they are resident, or, if that territory does not have a consumption tax, the person is carrying on a taxable activity in that territory that would make them liable to be registered in New Zealand if they were carrying it on here ▪ the person’s input tax claim for their first taxable period after registration is likely to be more than $500 or, with effect from 1 October 2016, the person is likely to be liable for GST levied by the New Zealand Customs Service under s 12 on the importation of goods ▪ the person’s taxable activity does not involve a performance of services where it is reasonably foreseeable that the performance of the services will be received in New Zealand by a person other than in the course of making taxable or exempt supplies (before 1 October 2016, received in New Zealand by an unregistered person) ▪ the person is not making, or intending to make, a taxable supply in New Zealand (or a supply that would be a taxable supply if the person were registered under s 51, to an unregistered person in New Zealand), and ▪ the person is not, and does not intend to become, a member of a group of companies carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand. If a non-resident registered under s 54B starts making taxable supplies or becomes a member of a group of companies making taxable supplies, they will be treated as not registered from that date.  Where a registered person has a non-resident parent or branch, the non-resident parent or branch may be treated as a separate person for these purposes and may be registered under s 54B if they satisfy the above requirements for registration. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 33 and Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 89. ▸Note: In January 2021, Inland Revenue released a draft interpretation statement, PUB00354, “GST – Registration of nonresidents under section 54B”. The draft item steps through each of the cumulative requirements of s 54B and provides examples as to how the section applies. In addition, the draft item contains flowcharts to help determine the place of supply of goods or services supplied by a non-resident and whether the non-resident is liable to register under s 51 or may be eligible to register under s 54B. The item also provides a brief discussion on the relevant administrative issues in relation to registration under s 54B. Exception from the bank account requirement Section 55B(2) of the Tax Administration Act provides an exception for non-residents to the requirement for an offshore person to have a fully functional New Zealand bank account to obtain an Inland Revenue number where the Inland Revenue number is required solely because they are registering for GST (whether under the usual registration rules in s 51 or the non-resident registration rules in s 54B). Bodies corporate Following the release of an issues paper, a government discussion document and draft legislation, rules were introduced for bodies corporate by the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2015–16, Research and Development, and Remedial Matters) Act 2016. The rules apply only to a “unit title body corporate”, which means a body corporate under the Unit Titles Act 2010 (including those established under the Unit Titles Act 1972), but excludes a body corporate of a retirement village registered under the Retirement Villages Act 2003.  The rules clarify that levies and other amounts paid by a body corporate’s members to the unit title body corporate are treated as consideration received for services supplied by the body corporate to its members. However, the value of the body corporate supplies to members is excluded from the body corporate’s total value of supplies when determining whether the unit title body corporate is required to register. These amendments apply retrospectively from the introduction of GST, ie 1 October 1986, to preserve past tax positions taken by bodies corporate. Thus, if a unit title body corporate only makes supplies to its members, it will not be required to register even if the $60,000 threshold is exceeded. However, if it is required to register because supplies to third parties exceed the registration threshold (or the body corporate decides to voluntarily register), the body corporate will be required to return output tax on the full value of both its member and third party supplies. Supply on day of registration If a unit title body corporate decides, or is required, to register, the body corporate will be treated as receiving consideration for a supply of services equal to the total value held by the body corporate on registration day of money and assets that are not common property (under the Unit Titles Act 2010) and were received by the body corporate as exempt supplies. The supply of services will be treated as performed on the day of registration. Voluntary registration Where a unit title body corporate makes an application to voluntarily register after 26 February 2015 (the date of the introduction of the relevant legislation), it must be registered with effect from a date after the registration application date. This prevents a body corporate from backdating its registration to avoid the output tax liability discussed above. A unit title body corporate that registers for GST will not be able to make an adjustment under s 21B for goods and services acquired before registration. Deregistration  Where a unit title body corporate that was registered before 26 February 2015 decides to cancel their registration after that date, the cancellation must take effect on or after the date they apply to cancel their registration. Any common property held by the unit title body corporate at the time of deregistration is valued at zero. This means the unit title body corporate is not required to return output tax on those assets held at the time its registration ceases. A unit title body corporate that registers for GST after 26 February 2015 will not be able to deregister for at least a period of four years. “Savings” provision A “savings” provision in ss 20(3)(hc) and 21HC preserved the position of GST-registered persons who held interests in unregistered bodies corporate, and who claimed input tax deductions for the GST charged on goods and services purchased by the body corporate. The savings provision applied when the GST-registered member had claimed a deduction for an amount of GST incurred by the body corporate, to the extent that the GST related to either specific costs incurred and passed on to that GST-registered member, or a share of the body corporate’s expenses that the member paid through their body corporate levies. The provision applied to supplies acquired by the body corporate in a taxable period ending on or after 1 November 2010 and before 3 November 2015, or that included 3 November 2015. Unincorporated bodies In June 2019, Inland Revenue released a QWBA, QB 19/11, “GST — administration or management services provided by an unincorporated body to its members” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 7, August 2019 at 32), which provides guidance on when a group of property owners, tenants or professionals who join together for administration or management of their common interests will be an “unincorporated body” for GST purposes and required to register and charge GST. The item does not consider the GST position of partnerships, joint ventures or the trustees of a trust providing administrative or management services to their members. It also does not consider bodies corporate under the Unit Titles Act 2010.  QB 19/11 provides that “a group of individuals or co-owners of property including a residents’ association, a property management committee or a clinic or practice manager established by professionals to carry out administrative services may be an “unincorporated body of persons” for GST purposes if they have the following kinds of characteristics: ▪ is formed by its members for one or more common purposes; ▪ has a significant degree of regulation governing the relationship between its members; ▪ has agreed rules, setting out matters like: □ how it is governed and how decisions are made by the body; □ how its funds may be used; □ what happens when members join and leave the group; and ▪ is a structure recognised as a collective entity of its members.” An unincorporated body will also usually have a name and a bank account. A group of people will not usually be an “unincorporated body of persons” for GST purposes if: ▪ they simply own property together, and all that is involved is a loose moral obligation to consult with their co-owners ▪ they make decisions together, but without forming a body with mutual duties and obligations between members ▪ there is no significant degree of regulation or agreement between them governing their relationship, and ▪ their relationship is confined to a cost-sharing arrangement.  The item concludes that when an unincorporated body makes supplies of administrative or management services to its members, that activity involves the body making supplies to another person within the definition of a taxable activity. Provided the activity is also carried on continuously or regularly and for a consideration, therefore satisfying the definition of a taxable activity, an unincorporated body must register when the value of all its supplies of goods and services, including its administrative or management services, exceed the $60,000 registration threshold. The body may also voluntarily register for GST if it is below the threshold. QB 19/11 also contains several examples. Law: GST ss 5(8A), (8AB), 10(7A), 21C, 51, 52(8), (9), 54B, 61A(6); TAA ss 55B(2), 143  ¶32-149 Cancellation of registration for GST Registration can be cancelled if a registered person: ▪ ceases to carry on all taxable activities, or ▪ ceases to be liable to be registered (that is, the projected value of that person’s taxable supplies in any year to come does not exceed $60,000). Deregistration triggers an output tax liability on assets held within the GST taxable activity. Cessation of all taxable activities A registered person must inform the Commissioner within 21 days of ceasing to carry on all taxable activities. The information must: ▪ specify the date of the cessation, and ▪ state whether the person intends to carry on any taxable activity within 12 months of the date of cessation. The Commissioner will then cancel the registration. Registration will not be cancelled if there are reasonable grounds for believing that  the business will carry on a taxable activity within the following 12month period. Notification of the date of cancellation will be sent to the business. COVID-19 variation to requirements for cancellation of registration for certain taxpayers In August 2020, the Commissioner made a COVID-19 statutory variation under s 6I of the Tax Administration Act 1994: COV 20/09, “Variation to sections 52(3) and 52(4) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 8, September 2020 at 22). The variation applied to GST-registered taxpayers with a taxable activity of supplying accommodation who, between 14 February 2020 and 31 October 2020, changed to making exempt supplies of accommodation, leaving them with no taxable activity. In these circumstances, the Commissioner would not cancel the registration of such a taxpayer if there were reasonable grounds for believing that they would carry on any taxable activity at any time within 18 months from the date their taxable activity ceased. This was subject to the conditions that: ▪ the impacts of COVID-19 response measures or the consequences of COVID-19 were the reason the taxpayer ceased their taxable activity of supplying accommodation, and ▪ the taxpayer informed the Commissioner of the cessation of all taxable activities, the date of cessation and that they intended to carry on a taxable activity within 18 months of that date. This variation recognised that COVID-19 had changed the market for short-stay accommodation in parts of New Zealand resulting in some suppliers temporarily changing to become suppliers of longer-term residential accommodation, an exempt supply. The Commissioner considered it appropriate in the circumstances that they should not have their registration cancelled only to have to renew their registration at a later date. Relevant cases  In Lopas v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,726, the Court of Appeal considered the correct legal construction of s 52(1). The Commissioner had accepted an application from a forestry partnership to cancel its GST registration with effect from 30 September 1999. The Commissioner cancelled the partnership’s GST registration from the date requested. Four days after applying to cancel their registration, the taxpayers sold the property to family trusts for $375,000 inclusive of GST (if any). The trusts were created by deeds dated 20 September 1999 and owned the property in partnership. The trusts partnership applied to become registered from 1 October 1999. The Commissioner considered that on a correct application of s 52(1), cancellation of registration was not available at the date applied for and sought to alter the date of the taxpayers’ GST deregistration to 30 November 1999. The significance of this was that an increased GST obligation was imposed on the taxpayers, ie output tax payable on the sale price of the property rather than its cost price. The Court of Appeal accepted the Commissioner’s approach. In Thompson v C of IR (2012) 25 NZTC ¶20-125, the Supreme Court noted that s 51(1) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 imposes a requirement to register for GST for a taxable activity when supplies over a 12-month period exceed the specified threshold. Taxpayers whose supplies are less than the threshold may become (or remain) registered on a voluntary basis. Under s 52, the entitlement to deregister rests on a forward-looking assessment that the taxpayer’s supplies for the succeeding 12 months will not exceed that threshold. The Court also noted that business assets retained by the taxpayer at deregistration are subject to output tax pursuant to s 5(3). In the case of assets that were acquired before 1 October 1986, output tax is calculated on the lesser of their cost price or open market value under s 10(8). When applying the test under s 52(1) and (2), the Court said that deregistration depends on the Commissioner being “satisfied” that taxable supplies for the next 12-month period will not be more than the threshold. Therefore, there will normally be, at the date of deregistration, a settled intention that there will be no relevant asset  disposals for at least 12 months and that, in the general run of cases, other taxable supplies will not exceed the threshold. The Supreme Court considered that the following comments may be of assistance should issues arise in the future as to the application of s 52: ▪ First and foremost, s 52 means what it says and there is not much point in trying to paraphrase it. ▪ Section 52 requires the Commissioner to be satisfied as to a negative (that turnover will not exceed the threshold). This involves an objective, forward-looking assessment and not one controlled by hindsight. ▪ The test will not be satisfied when transactions that would result in the turnover being exceeded are either being implemented at the proposed deregistration date or planned to occur (or contemplated as likely to occur) in the course of the succeeding 12 months. ▪ The test will probably be satisfied only where the taxpayer can show a settled intention that such transactions will not take place. Commissioner’s power to cancel registration The Commissioner can cancel registration pursuant to these criteria, ie cessation of all taxable activities or cessation of liability to be registered. The Commissioner can cancel the registration of a non-resident who does not carry on a taxable activity in New Zealand. The effect of this deregistration is that the non-resident cannot claim back the GST incurred on goods and services purchased in New Zealand. Non-residents are able to register in New Zealand for GST purposes without carrying on any taxable activity in New Zealand if they carry on a taxable activity overseas. This enables them to get input tax credits for their expansion in New Zealand. For example, when a person intends to carry on a business activity in New Zealand in the  next 12 months but is in the process of getting ready for that activity, GST refunds are allowed. The Commissioner’s discretion to deregister a non-resident will be exercised where, for example, a non-resident is temporarily in New Zealand and does not carry on or intend to carry on any taxable activity in New Zealand and whose only supplies in New Zealand are made for nil consideration. Date of cancellation Registration is cancelled as at the last day of the taxable period during which all taxable activities ceased or during which the person ceased to be liable to be registered or such other date as is determined by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner exercises his power of deregistration on the cessation of a person’s taxable activity, the effective date for cancellation of registration may be retrospective to a date not earlier than: ▪ the last day of the taxable period during which the taxable activity ceased, or ▪ the registration date, provided that no taxable activity was conducted after that date. The Commissioner is required to notify the person of the date on which the cancellation of the registration takes effect. Final return After cancellation, a final GST return must be filed and any GST owing paid. See s 16(4). The return must be provided on or before: ▪ the 28th of the month following the end of the taxable period, or ▪ the 15th of January, if the month following the end of the taxable period is December, or ▪ the 7th of May, if the month following the end of the taxable period is April. Liabilities survive cancellation  The liabilities and obligations of a registered person survive the cancellation of registration. Goods and services tax records must be retained for a period of at least seven years from the end of the taxable period to which they relate. Cancellation of registered non-residents Section 54C provides for instances when the Commissioner may cancel the registration of non-residents registered under s 54B (see ¶32-148). In addition to the usual powers to cancel registration, the Commissioner will be able to cancel the registration of a nonresident registered under s 54B if: ▪ the Commissioner is satisfied the person is no longer eligible to be registered under s 54B(1)(a), (this means that if the person’s registration for consumption tax in their own territory lapses or, if their territory does not have a consumption tax, their supplies drop below $60,000, they can be de-registered) ▪ for three consecutive taxable periods, the person has either not filed a return or has filed a late return. If registration is cancelled under the second bullet point above, the effective date of the cancellation will be the last day of the second taxable period. The non-resident will not be able to apply for registration again for five years from the date of cancellation, and this also applies to non-resident associates of the non-resident. Under s 5(3), there is a risk that a non-resident that deregistered for any reason may be liable for output tax on the market value of all their business assets, even if those assets were offshore. Section 5(3B) deals with this by ensuring that the only deemed supplies that will occur on deregistration will be: ▪ goods present in New Zealand at a time immediately before the person ceases to be registered, and ▪ services that would be performed in New Zealand at that time the person ceases to be registered.  See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 33. Law: GST ss 5(3), (3B), 10(7A), (8), 16(4), (5), 51(1), 52, 53, 54C  ¶32-150 Tax invoices for GST A registered person should ensure that he or she receives a tax invoice whenever goods and services purchased are charged with tax. Input tax may be deducted only if the registered person holds a tax invoice at the time the return is made. It is important to distinguish between an “invoice” and a “tax invoice”. An invoice is merely a written notification that payment is required. A tax invoice is a specific type of invoice. It must contain all the prescribed particulars (see ¶32-160 and ¶32-170). Issue of tax invoice Generally, the supplier issues the tax invoice. A registered person making a supply is to issue a tax invoice whenever the recipient of the supply (who is registered) requests one. The supplier must do so within 28 days of the request. Failure to do so is an absolute liability offence under s 143(1)(ba) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The supplier (vendor) will be liable to a fine of up to $4,000 for the first offence, $8,000 for the second offence and $12,000 for the third offence. See s 143(3) of the TAA. A supplier may issue only one original tax invoice. Any copy to be provided must be marked “copy only”. Agents who are registered may issue a tax invoice for supplies made on behalf of their principals. See s 60(1) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Knowingly issuing two tax invoices for one supply is a knowledge offence. See s 143A(1)(f) of the TAA. Note, however, that s 60(1B) deals with the situation where two invoices are being issued by an agent and a principal, despite the breach of the Act — see ¶32-059. Section 60(1B) provides that despite s 60(1), if an agent and principal agree, a supply may be treated as two separate supplies and therefore two invoices may legally be issued.  A registered person can use a trading name on tax invoices and credit and debit notes instead of the actual name of the registered person provided Inland Revenue has been previously notified. There are certain situations where a tax invoice is not required; for example, when the consideration in money is less than $50, when a registered person buys secondhand goods from a non-registered person or when the Commissioner is satisfied that there are sufficient records to establish the particulars of any supply or the class of supplies. Note that GST applies to the supply by non-resident suppliers of remote services to New Zealand-resident consumers. With effect from 1 December 2019, GST also applies to the supply by nonresident suppliers of distantly taxable goods. The non-resident suppliers are not required to provide a tax invoice. However, in the event that a GST-registered business is inadvertently charged GST, if the GST-exclusive value of the supply (before 1 December 2019, the GST-inclusive payment for the supply) is $1,000 or less (in New Zealand currency as at the time of the supply), a non-resident supplier has the option to provide a tax invoice to the purchaser to allow them to claim a deduction, rather than to refund the GST charged. See ¶32-064 and ¶32-067. Note also that, if a non-resident supplier chooses to treat the supply of distantly taxable goods to a registered recipient as a supply made in New Zealand under s 8(4F), the non-resident is then required to provide a tax invoice. See s 24(5BB) and ¶32-064. Electronic invoices are discussed at ¶32-200. Multiple supplies A single tax invoice may be issued where several supplies are made. For example, only one tax invoice need be issued when a wholesaler sells a range of products to a retailer. The invoice may show only the total relevant figures, although all goods and services supplied must be sufficiently described. Shared tax invoices  Section 24BA allows a single, shared tax invoice to be issued by one principal supplier where two or more registered suppliers combine to make a supply of goods or services. Shared tax invoices can be issued in the following situations: ▪ where suppliers have statutory obligations that make it practical to use a single invoice, and/or ▪ where suppliers are part of the same group of companies. Section 24BA sets out the particulars a shared tax invoice must contain for it to be considered valid. The information is similar to the current requirements of a standard tax invoice. The only notable difference is the name and GST registration number of the supplier on a shared tax invoice, this information will be the principal supplier’s name and GST registration number. The principal supplier is: ▪ the supplier responsible for issuing the invoice, or ▪ the representative member of a group of companies. Law: GST ss 2(1), 24, 24BA, 60(1), (1B); TAA ss 143, 143A  ¶32-155 Buyer created tax invoices for GST The recipient of a supply may issue a tax invoice, provided all of the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ both the recipient and the supplier are registered persons ▪ the Commissioner has granted prior approval for the issue of such documents — retrospective approval may not be granted ▪ the supplier and the recipient agree that the supplier will not issue a tax invoice for the taxable supply ▪ the document is provided to the supplier and a copy is retained by the recipient, and  ▪ the words “buyer created tax invoice — IRD approved” are shown in a prominent place on that document. The issue of a tax invoice by the supplier to the recipient must be ignored if the recipient has already issued a tax invoice. The Commissioner may revoke approval for the issue of such invoices if satisfied these conditions have not been complied with. The tax compliance record of a recipient applying to the Commissioner for approval for the issue of buyer created invoices is a relevant circumstance. See Case M132 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,859. In Case M132, due to a poor compliance record, the Commissioner prohibited the taxpayer from creating his own tax invoices to claim input tax credits on supplies made to him. Law: GST s 24(2)  ¶32-160 GST tax invoices for supplies exceeding $1,000 Whenever the price of a supply (including GST) exceeds $1,000, the tax invoice is to state: ▪ the words “tax invoice” in a prominent place ▪ the name and registration number of the supplier ▪ the name and address of the recipient of the supply ▪ the date of issue ▪ a description of the goods and services supplied ▪ the quantity or volume of the goods and services supplied, and ▪ either: □ the tax-exclusive amount, the tax, and the tax-inclusive amount, or  □ when the tax rate is the standard rate, the tax-inclusive price and a statement to the effect that it is an inclusive price. The supplier’s name can be the legal name or any trading name which Inland Revenue has previously been notified will be used on tax invoices and credit/debit notes. See also ¶32-170 and ¶32-180. Law: GST s 24(3)  ¶32-170 GST tax invoices for supplies between $50 and $1,000 An abbreviated form of invoice may be used when the GST-inclusive cost of the goods and services supplied exceeds $50 but not $1,000. The required details are: ▪ the words “tax invoice” in a prominent place ▪ the name and registration number of the supplier ▪ the date upon which the tax invoice is issued ▪ a description of the goods and services supplied, and ▪ the consideration for the supply and a statement that it includes a charge in respect of tax. This type of invoice must not be used for zero-rated supplies, or for supplies of distantly taxable goods or remote services to GSTregistered businesses that have incorrectly been charged GST and the supplier chooses to provide a tax invoice. Registered persons, as a matter of practice, might prefer to use the more detailed form of invoice for all supplies. Law: GST s 24(4)  ¶32-180 GST tax invoices for supplies of $50 or less Although a tax invoice need not be issued if the GST-inclusive cost of a supply is $50 or less, a registered person must keep sufficient records of a purchase to support a claim for an input tax deduction. As a minimum, the Commissioner requires the registered person to record the date, description of the goods, cost and supplier details of all purchases. Ideally, supporting documentation such as receipts should be kept as well. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 4, October 1995 at 9. Law: GST ss 24(5), 75  ¶32-190 Content of the tax invoice for GST Several GST rules relate to the content of a tax invoice. All amounts of money are to be expressed in New Zealand currency, otherwise the tax invoice will be unacceptable to the Commissioner. Note that an exception to this exists for a non-resident supplier of distantly taxable goods or remote services: see ¶32-064 and ¶32067. If the price of a supply is set in a foreign currency, the New Zealand dollar equivalent as at the time of supply is to be included in the tax invoice. The appropriate exchange rate is the “buy-rate” offered by an approved bank or bureau de change at the time of supply. See BR Pub 04/01 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 2, March 2004 at 3). This ruling applies for an indefinite period from 1 March 2004. No adjustment is made for GST purposes for any subsequent exchange gain or loss, as this is consideration for an exempt supply. If a prompt payment discount offer is included on a tax invoice, the supplier need not issue a credit note when early payment is made. It had been suggested that, a registered person could alternatively issue a combined tax invoice and credit note (but not later issue a separate credit note for the same supply). However, this practice was called into question and, in February 2018, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 18/06, “Can a  registered person issue a combined tax invoice and credit note or debit note?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 37), that makes it clear that a tax invoice and credit note may not be combined if they both relate to the same supply. A credit note must be issued after a tax invoice has been provided. A combined tax invoice and credit note may only be issued where the two relate to different supplies; for example, where telephone supplies are invoiced monthly, the tax invoice for one month’s supply may be combined with a credit note relating to a previous month’s supply. In cases where a prompt payment discount is clearly shown on the face of a tax invoice, the supplier does not need to issue a credit note where the recipient takes advantage of the discount. Example 1: An abbreviated tax invoice:  Example 2: A full tax invoice:  The tax invoice must be made out to the registered person and not to another person or jointly to the registered person and another person. See Case M132 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,859, Case N39 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,333 at 3,340. Alternatively, the invoice can be made out to a person who receives the supply as an agent. See s 60(2). A sale and purchase agreement does not normally constitute a tax invoice. It will do if it incorporates the requisite content. See Lancashire Investments Ltd (in liq) (1998) 18 NZTC 13,890. Electronic invoices may be issued, see further at ¶32-200. Law: GST ss 24, 60(2), 77  ¶32-200 Electronic tax invoices for GST  Tax invoices may be in electronic form. Any differences in the content or format of electronically transmitted invoices are of no consequence when all the minimum invoice requirements contained in s 24 of the GST Act are met. A tax invoice is not issued when the transmission is incomplete and not acknowledged by the recipient. In these cases, the message when eventually received is the original and not a copy. Any reissued tax invoices must include the words “copy only”. Electronic invoices are “records” for the purposes of s 22(7) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Electronic tax invoices must be retained for at least seven years after the end of the taxable period to which they relate. Inland Revenue (IR) officers must have ready access free of charge to viewing and printing facilities. It may be necessary to establish the admissibility of electronic records in any proceedings. The electronic recording of records where the originals are in hard copy form is acceptable provided the records, if printed, are identical in format and all other respects to the original records. Registered persons, on approval by the Commissioner, can use symbols, abbreviations or other notations to facilitate the electronic transfer of tax invoices, credit or debit notes, and receipts for supplies of distantly taxable goods. For example, the abbreviation “TI” may represent the words “tax invoice”. See s 25A. Approval may be expressed to apply generally or only in particular cases, may be subject to conditions, and may be withdrawn or varied at any time on reasonable notice. There is no prescribed application form. IR has released a standard practice statement, SPS 13/01: “Retention of business records in electronic format, application to store records offshore and application to keep records in Māori”, which provides guidelines on the retention of business records in electronic format and sets out the Commissioner’s practice when considering an application to store business records offshore. The SPS provides that records stored electronically must meet the requirements of the Electronic Transactions Act 2002 that: ▪ the integrity of the information contained in the records is to be maintained, and  ▪ the information is readily accessible so as to be usable for subsequent reference. The Commissioner considers that these requirements will be met if the practices set out in the SPS are followed. The SPS is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 3, April 2013 at 8. (Note that, from 1 September 2017, the Electronic Transactions Act 2002 was repealed and replaced by Pt 4 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017.) ▸ Note: In December 2020, IR released a draft standard practice statement, ED0226, “Retention of business records in electronic formats, application to store records offshore and keeping records in languages other than English or te reo Māori”. The draft statement is intended to replace SPS 13/01 when finalised and updates the Commissioner’s practice to take into account the requirements of the Contract and Commercial Law (Electronic Transactions) Regulations 2017. A person who carries on business in New Zealand, including those who do business via the Internet, are required to keep sufficient business records to enable an IR officer to readily ascertain the amount of tax payable by the business and all other tax matters relating to that business. Section 22(8) of the TAA gives the Commissioner the power to authorise a person (a third party) to keep multiple taxpayers’ records offshore in an approved form. An individual taxpayer is also permitted to keep their own business records offshore. Section 22AAC(1) of the TAA provides that a person who stores a return in an appropriate electronic form is not required to retain a signed hardcopy transcript. Section 36(3) of the TAA provides that a person who files and retains a form electronically is not required to retain a signed hardcopy transcript. For a fuller discussion on the retention of electronic records, see ¶1505. Law: GST ss 25A, 75; TAA s 22(7), (8)  ¶32-205 Credit and debit notes A price may be altered after a taxable supply is made. Any GST return or tax invoice prepared on the basis of the original price might, therefore, show an incorrect GST element. A GST adjustment must be made if a return or tax invoice shows an incorrect GST component because: ▪ the supply was cancelled ▪ s 11(1)(mb) was incorrectly applied to the supply ▪ the nature of the supply has been fundamentally varied or altered ▪ the supply of remote services or distantly taxable goods has been incorrectly treated ▪ the consideration for the supply has been altered (eg because of a discount), or ▪ part or all of the supply has been returned. Adjustment by the supplier or recipient A supplier must make an adjustment if they have furnished a return and accounted for an incorrect amount of tax. The adjustment must be made to the correct amount of tax. If the consideration for the supply is increased, the supplier must account to the Commissioner for GST charged on the increase. If the consideration is reduced, the supplier may deduct (in his or her return) the GST originally charged on the reduced amount. The adjustment should be made in the taxable period in which the change become apparent. An adjustment can also be made by any registered recipient who knows of the consideration reduction or has been issued with a credit note. The recipient must account to the Commissioner for GST originally claimed as a deduction on the amount of the reduction.  Issue of credit or debit note by the supplier If the supplier has provided a tax invoice to the recipient of the supply, and the amount of tax charged (as shown on the tax invoice) is reduced, the supplier must issue a credit note to the recipient. On the other hand, if the amount of tax charged (as shown on the tax invoice) is increased, the supplier must issue a debit note to the recipient. The credit or debit note enables the recipient to make a GST adjustment. The obligation to issue a credit or debit note is only triggered if a tax invoice has been provided. This reflects the purpose of credit or debit notes. If aspects of the supply have changed, resulting in the tax charged on the supply being incorrect, then the credit or debit note will indicate any necessary adjustment to the tax charged. If no tax invoice has been issued before the supply changes, then no credit note or debit note can be issued under s 25(3)(a) or (b). However, a supplier still needs to issue a tax invoice under s 24(1). In this case, the tax invoice should contain the details of the changed supply. A credit note or debit note must contain: ▪ the words “credit note” or “debit note” in a prominent place ▪ the name and registration number of the supplier ▪ the name and address of the recipient of the supply ▪ the date on which the credit or debit note was issued ▪ either: □ the amount of consideration shown in the tax invoice, the correct consideration amount, the difference between those two amounts, and the tax charged on that difference, or □ where the tax charged is the tax fraction of the consideration, the difference between the correct consideration and that shown in the invoice and a  statement that the difference includes a charge in respect of the tax, and ▪ a brief explanation of the circumstances giving rise to the issuing of the credit or debit note. Only one credit or debit note may be provided. If a registered person claims to have lost the original, the supplier or recipient, as the case may be, may provide a copy clearly marked “copy only”. A supplier is not required to provide a credit note if the reduction in consideration is a result of the recipient taking up a prompt payment discount offered by the supplier and the terms of the discount are clearly shown on the tax invoice. Note also that a credit note may not be issued after seven years from the date of settlement of a transaction where s 11(1)(mb) was incorrectly applied to the treatment of the supply. Buyer-created credit and debit notes As with a tax invoice, the recipient (eg the buyer) may choose to issue the document. A credit or debit note may be issued by the recipient if: ▪ the Commissioner has granted prior approval for the issue of such documents ▪ the supplier and the recipient agree that the supplier is not to issue a credit or debit note for the supply, and ▪ a copy of the document is provided to the supplier and another copy is retained by the recipient. The issue of a credit or debit note by the supplier to the recipient must be ignored if the recipient has already issued a credit or debit note. Dispensing with the requirements Where the Commissioner is satisfied there are or will be sufficient records available to establish the particulars of any supply and that it  would be impracticable to require a credit or debit note to be issued, the Commissioner may determine that: ▪ a credit or debit note does not have to be issued, or ▪ any of the required particulars need not be specified. Conditions may be imposed on any such dispensation. Multiple supplies or recipients Suppliers may, with the Commissioner’s approval, issue one or more tax invoices to recipients in respect of taxable supplies. In these instances, one credit or debit note may be issued by a supplier in respect of the taxable supplies made to the recipient(s). This mechanism would be used, for example, in respect of credit notes issued for volume discounts calculated on a monthly or two-monthly basis. The Commissioner must be satisfied that sufficient records will be available to establish the particulars of each taxable supply and may impose conditions on the issue of such credit or debit notes. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes two amendments to ensure that a supplier that issues a GST credit note to correct a previous mistake in a GST return receives similar outcomes to a supplier that applies to the Commissioner to amend the original GST return. The first proposed amendment will explicitly allow a supplier to issue a credit note to correct a mistake where a supplier has issued an incorrect invoice charging GST on a supply of goods or services that was actually a zero-rated or exempt supply. The supplier can then include an adjustment for the correct amount of GST in the GST return for the taxable period in which the credit note was issued. The proposed amendment is intended to apply retrospectively from 1 April 2012 to align with existing commercial practices. The second proposed amendment sets time limits for issuing a credit note for a supply made in an earlier period. The proposed time limit for issuing a credit note is intended to align with the “time bar” that applies to GST refunds made through amendments to GST returns,  which is generally four years from the end of the taxable period (see ¶32-240). The proposed amendment is intended to apply from 4 June 2020, the date of the introduction of the Bill. Law: GST s 25  ¶32-220 Dispensing with GST tax invoice requirements On occasions, it can be impracticable to issue a tax invoice. For example, it may be impracticable to issue a tax invoice each month if commercial rent is paid monthly by automatic payment authority. In this type of situation, if prior approval is sought, the Commissioner may determine that: ▪ a tax invoice does not have to be issued, or ▪ any of the required particulars need not be specified in the tax invoice. Under s 24(6), before making a determination that an invoice is not required the Commissioner must apply a two-step test. First, the Commissioner has to be satisfied that there are (or will be) sufficient alternative records available to establish the particulars of any supply. Secondly, the Commissioner has to also decide whether it would be impractical to require an invoice to be issued (eg in the above lease situation). The Commissioner considers that such dispensation will be rare. Conditions may be imposed on any dispensation. If the conditions are not complied with, the Commissioner can revoke the dispensation. In the event that permission is given to issue a modified invoice, the words “modified tax invoice — IRD approved” must appear in a prominent place on the document. Law: GST s 24(6), (6A), (10)  ¶32-222 Conditional invoices for GST  A conditional invoice is one that is sent out before it is certain that a supply will take place and that contains the words “This becomes a tax invoice when paid” or “This becomes a tax invoice only if officially receipted”. Examples are: ▪ renewal notices issued for subscriptions ▪ insurance policies that offer to provide goods and services for a consideration and are not notifying an obligation to make a payment, and ▪ dog registration application forms used by a local body. In these instances, the time of supply generally occurs when payment is made or a formal invoice is issued. Inland Revenue has ruled that conditional invoices may be endorsed with the words “This becomes a tax invoice when paid” or “This becomes a tax invoice only if officially receipted”, provided they satisfy the requirements of s 24. However, input tax cannot be claimed until the amount has been paid or the document is officially receipted on payment of the fee, because the document does not become a tax invoice until this time.  ¶32-223 GST and late filing penalty A late filing penalty will be imposed for failing to file a GST return on time. However, the penalty will not be imposed the first time that a GST return is late. Instead, Inland Revenue (IR) will issue a warning that any subsequent late returns, in the 12 months following the first breach, will be penalised. The late filing penalty will be payable if any GST returns are filed late in the 12 months following the first breach. If all GST returns due in the next 12 months are filed on time, the process will start again — that is, if a subsequent return is late, the taxpayer will receive a warning. The amount of the late filing penalty is:  ▪ $250, if on the due date for the return the registered person accounts for GST on an invoice or hybrid basis (see ¶32-078), or ▪ $50, if on the due date for the return the registered person accounts for GST on a payments basis. The due date for the payment of the late filing penalty for a return required by ss 16–18 of the GST Act is: ▪ the 15th day of February, if the month following the end of the taxable period is December ▪ the 7th day of June, if the month following the end of the taxable period is April, or ▪ in all other cases, the 28th day of the second month following the end of the taxable period. Law: TAA ss 139AAA, 142(1B)  ¶32-225 Interest and penalties for GST Interest Interest is imposed under Pt 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 in every case where there has been non-payment, an underpayment or late payment of tax. The Commissioner has no discretion to waive interest. Interest payable by the taxpayer is calculated on a daily basis on the amount of unpaid tax and is also charged on any accumulated penalties, such as late payment penalties and tax shortfall penalties. For a full discussion of interest payable to and by the Commissioner, see ¶14-200. Penalties A range of penalties may apply depending on a taxpayer’s default. Briefly, these penalties include:  ▪ a late payment penalty (see ¶14-050) ▪ shortfall penalties for— □ not taking reasonable care (see ¶14-112) □ unacceptable tax position (see ¶14-115) □ gross carelessness (see ¶14-117) □ abusive tax position (see ¶14-119) □ evasion and similar acts (see ¶14-121) ▪ criminal offences and penalties— □ absolute liability offences (see ¶14-240) □ knowingly failing to comply with an obligation (see ¶14-250) □ evasion-type offences (see ¶14-260). For a full discussion of the penalties that may apply, including the ability to gain reductions in penalties, dates for payment of penalties and the remission of penalties, see Chapter 14 Penalties, Interest and Offences.  ¶32-240 GST and refund of excess tax paid The Commissioner is required to refund excess tax if an assessment results in a registered person having overpaid tax or being entitled to a refund. The Commissioner must refund GST overpaid if he or she is satisfied that the amount of the refund represents an excess over the amount properly payable. The Commissioner must also refund GST overpaid as a result of a reassessment and GST that should have been refunded at an earlier time.  In general, a four-year time limit applies. However, an eight-year period applies for GST overpaid as a result of a clear mistake or simple oversight. See s 45(4) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Disagreement as to the merits of the refund claimed can trigger the disputes and/or penalties regime. Interest will be payable by the party who ultimately has to refund or pay GST for the relevant taxable period. The Commissioner may apply refunds of GST against tax, including income tax, owing under any of the Inland Revenue Acts. Under s 174AA of the Tax Administration Act 1994 the Commissioner need not refund any amount of $20 or less. Law: GST ss 45–47; TAA ss 108A, 174A, 174AA  ¶32-245 Timing of refunds and ability to withhold refunds for GST Subject to certain exceptions, the Commissioner is required to make refunds arising from an excess of input tax deductions and adjustments over output tax or following a change in accounting basis not later than 15 working days following the day of receipt by the Commissioner of the relevant return (see s 46(1)(a) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act)). A “working day” is defined in the GST Act as any day other than Saturday, Sunday, Good Friday, Easter Monday, Anzac Day, Labour Day, the Sovereign’s birthday and Waitangi Day, a day in the period from 25 December in any year to 15 January in the following year, and the Monday following Waitangi Day or Anzac Day if either of those days fall on a Saturday or Sunday. The Commissioner may withhold a refund: ▪ if the Commissioner is not satisfied with a return and a decision is made to investigate that return  ▪ if a registered person has failed to furnish a return for any taxable period, or ▪ when further information is requested in respect of a GST return. In addition, the Commissioner may deduct from the amount to be refunded (including any interest) any overdue GST or tax remaining unpaid under any Inland Revenue Act (for example, income tax) in accordance with the registered person’s, or his or her tax agent’s, request or, in the absence of a request, in such order or manner as the Commissioner determines. See s 173T of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) and s 46(6) of the GST Act. When a decision is made to investigate a return or a refund is withheld for failing to file a return, written notice must be given to the registered person within 15 working days after the day of receipt of the return (s 46(5)). When the decision is to request further information, the initial request must be given within 15 working days following the day of receipt of the return (s 46(4)). Although s 46(4) (b) provides that subsequent requests for information must be given within 15 working days following the date of receipt of any information previously requested by the Commissioner, the Supreme Court decision in Contract Pacific Ltd v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20006 means this provision may have little practical effect. See below. Where a timely request for information or a timely notice of a decision to investigate has been made under s 46(4) or (5), respectively, the Commissioner is then not required to make a refund until the day after the working day that she determines the amount is refundable and she is satisfied the registered person has complied with their tax obligations (see s 46(1)(b)). Section 46(1B) extends the refund and investigation period from 15 days to 90 days for registered non-residents. This extended period reflects the fact that non-residents’ returns may require some communication before they can be finally processed, and thus an extended period is desirable to allow for this communication. Application of s 46  In Sea Hunter Fishing Ltd v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,206 and Sea Hunter Fishing Ltd v C of IR (No 2) (2001) 20 NZTC 17,216, the High Court confirmed that there was a statutory obligation to refund no later than 15 working days from the day on which the registered person’s return was received by the Commissioner. It was within the Commissioner’s power to defer that obligation by issuing an assessment or, alternatively, to proceed in accordance with s 46 of the GST Act. In this case, an affidavit from the taxpayer’s accountant confirmed that the deadline had not been met. Because the Commissioner had failed to meet the statutory deadline for a request for information to be sent to the taxpayer, the High Court ordered the Commissioner to honour a $2.5m GST refund cheque that Inland Revenue (IR) had stopped, claiming it was issued in error. The Court of Appeal held that the Commissioner had failed to fulfil the statutory condition in s 46 to give an information request concerning a GST return or to notify an intention to investigate the circumstances of the return within a period of 15 working days following the day the taxpayer’s return was received by the Commissioner. If a request for information or a notification of an intention to investigate is not carried out in due time, the Commissioner is not precluded from commencing an investigation and making a request for information after the expiry of the 15working-day period. However, in the meantime, he must promptly pay the claimed refund. The practical effect of the section is that a request is not given by the Commissioner until it actually reaches the taxpayer (or the taxpayer’s agent) or is deemed to have been received in accordance with s 14(2) of the TAA. See C of IR v Sea Hunter Fishing Ltd (2002) 20 NZTC 17,478 (CA). In Contract Pacific Ltd v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-006, the Supreme Court dismissed the taxpayer’s appeal from the Court of Appeal decision reported as C of IR v Contract Pacific Ltd (2010) 24 NZTC 24,006 and held that the Commissioner had satisfied the time limits set by s 46 because the taxpayer was notified of IR’s intention to investigate a refund claim within the 15-working-day time period. Once timely notice of investigation under s 46(5) was given on 10  July 2000, later requests for information by the Commissioner could not sensibly be regarded as subject to the s 46(4) time limits. In other words, requests for further information made as part of the investigation did not need to be made within any time limit. Accordingly, in this case the Commissioner’s request for information in January 2001 was valid and so there was no obligation to make a refund to the taxpayer. The Supreme Court found that, since the Commissioner gave notice of investigation within 15 days of the receipt of the taxpayer’s return, the s 46(1)(a) obligation to make the refund within 15 days was overtaken by the exception in s 46(1)(b). The requirement to make a refund could therefore not be enforced until the Commissioner had determined that the GST was refundable and was satisfied that the taxpayer had complied with its tax obligations under s 46(1)(b). Since the Commissioner was not satisfied that these criteria had been met, the Court said that the refund claimed never became payable. The Supreme Court did recognise that its interpretation of s 46 means that the specification of a time limit for follow up requests of information may be of limited practical effect. However, the Court did not see the request for information procedure as redundant. In the sort of cases for which it is intended, namely routine inquiries, the Court assumed the Commissioner’s staff would continue to employ it and, where they did, the statutory time limit for further requests would, in practice and by their exhortatory effect, ensure reasonable expedition. See also Riccarton Construction Ltd v C of IR (2010) 24 NZTC 24,191 (HC). Refund following investigation When the tax liability of a registered person over a number of taxable periods is investigated, the Commissioner may allow any amount found to be refundable to be deducted from any tax assessed to be payable. This applies notwithstanding that the time limit for making the refund has expired (see above). The Commissioner has a  discretion to allow such deductions to the extent that, in the Commissioner’s opinion, it is equitable to do so. Partial refunds Under s 174A of the TAA the Commissioner may refund overpaid GST: ▪ for a GST return period, or ▪ for more than one GST return period, if the return periods are the subject of one NOPA. The refund may be made even if other GST liabilities of the registered person in respect of the GST return period or periods remain the subject of a NOPA or one or more outstanding assessments. The partial refund will only be made if all of the following are satisfied: ▪ the Commissioner considers there is no risk to IR in making the refund ▪ the registered person generally complies with all of his or her GST return and payment obligations ▪ the registered person is not in material breach of any of his or her other tax obligations, and ▪ after the refund is made, the registered person will have paid (or will be credited as having paid) GST for the GST return period(s) to an amount at least equal to the GST that remains the subject of the NOPA or outstanding assessment(s). Direct crediting of refunds Since 7 February 2017, a refund of GST paid in excess must be made by direct credit to a bank account nominated by the taxpayer, unless this will cause undue hardship or is not practicable: s 184A of the TAA.  Interest on refunds Interest is payable by the Commissioner on refunds of GST. For the current interest rate, see ¶50-083. If the return is supplied before the due date for payment, the interest runs from the 10th working day (15th working day for taxable periods ending before 1 April 2018) after IR receives the GST return. In all other cases, use of money interest is payable from the later of: ▪ the day after the day on which the return is provided, or ▪ the day after the day on which payment is made. Any refunds of GST must be applied first against any use of money interest obligations the taxpayer has, and then against the taxpayer’s GST liability: s 120F of the TAA. If the Commissioner has withheld a refund following an investigation or a request for further information, interest is payable by the Commissioner if the refund is not paid within the time frame set out above. Use of money interest is not payable on GST refunds for nonresidents registered under s 54B of the GST Act. See further at ¶14-200. Law: GST ss 2(1), 46; TAA ss 120C, 120F, 173T, 174A, 184A  ¶32-275 Assessment and disputes resolution procedures for GST GST is collected under a system of self-assessment. GST is to be paid to (or refunded by) the Commissioner in accordance with the information provided in a return. The Commissioner will only intervene when dissatisfied with the return made or where the registered person fails to self-assess. The Commissioner has specific powers to amend a taxpayer’s assessment or to make an assessment, see ss 106 and 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Note that “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 09/04: “The  relationship between section 113 of the TAA and the proviso to section 20(3) of the GST Act” states that it is not the Commissioner’s practice to exercise the discretion in s 113 when s 20(3) provides a specific mechanism by which taxpayers can correct a failure to claim an input tax deduction themselves. However, in certain circumstances (such as where the tax position was adopted on the basis of incorrect advice given by Inland Revenue), the Commissioner will exercise the discretion. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 6, August 2009 at 53. In June 2020, Inland Revenue released standard practice statement SPS 20/03, “Requests to amend assessments” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 6, July 2020 at 11), which replaced SPS 16/01. The SPS confirms that the Commissioner’s practice is generally not to exercise her discretion under s 113 of the TAA when s 20(3) provides a specific mechanism and refers taxpayers to QB 09/04 for further guidance. If a person’s GST return contains one or more errors and the total discrepancy is $1,000 or less or the error is not material for that person, then the person is allowed to rectify the error in the next return due after discovering the error. See s 113A of the TAA and ¶32-074. Pursuant to s 138E(1)(e)(iv) taxpayers cannot challenge the exercise of the Commissioner’s discretion under s 113 by commencing proceedings in a hearing authority. However, the exercise of this discretion may be subject to judicial review. A person may judicially challenge an assessment issued by the Commissioner, but only if the person has fulfilled the requirements of the disputes resolution process within the prescribed time limits. See ¶4-120 and ¶4-215. Law: TAA ss 106, 113, 113A, 138  ¶32-280 Avoidance and GST Section 76 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act) is a general anti-avoidance provision, similar to s BG 1 of the Income Tax  Act 2007 (see ¶33-010 to ¶33-085). The general effect of s 76 is to give the Commissioner the power to counteract any tax advantage obtained by a registered person from or under a tax avoidance arrangement. In other words, the arrangement is void against the Commissioner. A tax avoidance arrangement is defined as an arrangement that directly or indirectly has: ▪ tax avoidance as its purpose or effect, or ▪ tax avoidance as one of its purposes or effects (unless it is merely incidental), whether or not another purpose or effect relates to ordinary business or family dealings. “Arrangement” is given the same definition in s 76(8) of the GST Act as that contained in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007, namely “an agreement, contract, plan, or understanding, whether enforceable or unenforceable, including all steps and transactions by which it is carried into effect”. The term “tax avoidance” includes: ▪ a reduction or postponement in the liability of a registered person to pay tax ▪ an increase in the entitlement of a registered person to a refund of tax ▪ an earlier entitlement of a registered person to a refund of tax ▪ a reduction in the total consideration payable by a person for a supply of goods and services. Much of the case law on the parallel anti-avoidance provisions of the Income Tax Acts will be relevant to the interpretation of s 76 of the GST Act. In addition, in June 2013, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement IS 13/01, “Tax avoidance and the interpretation of sections BG 1 and GA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 7, August 2013 at 4),  outlining the Commissioner’s view of the law on tax avoidance in New Zealand. Although not dealing directly with s 76 of the GST Act, much of the discussion contained in the statement may be of use in interpreting that section. See further at ¶33-137. The Commissioner’s power to deal with tax avoidance arrangements extends to treating: ▪ a non-registered person as registered ▪ a supply to be made by or to any person ▪ a supply to occur in the taxable period in which it would have occurred had it not been for the (void) arrangement, and ▪ a supply to have been made at its “open market value”. Also, if part or all of a taxable activity is transferred between associated parties, the turnover of the transferred activity can be attributed to both the transferor and the transferee for the purposes of calculating the GST registration and other threshold levels. This applies unless the Commissioner considers the result to be inequitable. See s 76(5)–(7). Case law on s 76 The application of s 76 was considered in Case W22 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,212. This case involved a scheme in relation to land subdivision and development. The scheme was designed to take advantage of the mismatch between invoice-based and paymentsbased registered person. The Taxation Review Authority held that the scheme was an arrangement that defeated the intention of the GST Act by allowing the taxpayer to obtain an input tax refund that would not otherwise have been payable. The scheme prevented the application of the Act by denying the Crown, on the one hand, the revenue that the GST Act was designed to exact and on the other by requiring it to disgorge public moneys to fund the development of $80m worth of property. This decision was affirmed by the High Court in Ch’elle Properties (NZ) Ltd v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,618 and upheld by the Court of Appeal in Ch’elle Properties (NZ)  Ltd v C of IR (2007) 23 NZTC 21,442. The Court of Appeal held that the 10–20 year delay defeated the intent of the GST Act and accordingly triggered s 76. The Supreme Court subsequently dismissed the taxpayer’s application for leave to appeal the decision. Other similar schemes exploiting the timing mismatch between taxpayers registered on an invoice basis and those on a payments basis have also been found to be void under s 76: see Case X23 (2006) 22 NZTC 12,290 and Case X25 (2006) 22 NZTC 12,303. Section 19D requires a taxpayer registered on a payments basis who makes a single supply (or a number of related supplies) for a consideration of more than $225,000 to return that supply on an invoice basis. The purpose of this tax avoidance provision is to close an identified loophole whereby a person registered for GST on a payments basis supplied goods or services (usually property) to a person who was registered on an invoice basis. Settlement was deferred for a length of time (a number of years in some cases) giving a timing advantage to the supplier, who did not have to account for output tax until settlement eventually occurred. The section limits a taxpayer’s ability to exploit the mismatch between registration bases. Supplies by payments basis taxpayers below $225,000 may still be caught by s 76: see Education Administration Ltd v C of IR (2010) 24 NZTC 24,238 (HC). In Glenharrow Holdings Ltd v C of IR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,319, the High Court held that the purchase price of a mining licence by Glenharrow Holdings Ltd for $45m was grossly inflated and applied s 76 to reduce the consideration upon which the requested input tax refund was based. The Court of Appeal supported the Commissioner’s approach to deem the supply to occur at open market value and also found the arrangement to be tax avoidance. The arrangement was tax avoidance because the obligation to pay the purchase price was, in commercial terms, only a conditional commitment to repay a loan. The taxpayer had not suffered the economic burden intended by Parliament that would entitle it to claim an input tax deduction for the full amount of the purchase price. See Glenharrow Holdings Ltd v C of IR (2007) 23 NZTC 21,564 (CA).  On appeal, the Supreme Court considered that there was a twostage process before the Commissioner could carry out a reconstruction under s 76. First, the Commissioner must have been justified in coming to the view that there was an “arrangement” entered into between at least two persons. Secondly, the Commissioner must have been properly satisfied that the arrangement was entered into between the parties to defeat the intent and application of the GST Act or any provision of the Act. The Supreme Court found the effect of the arrangement produced a GST refund that was disproportionate with the economic burden suffered by the taxpayer or the economic benefit obtained by the vendor. See Glenharrow Holdings Ltd v C of IR (2009) 24 NZTC 23,236 (SC). Law: GST ss 19D, 76  BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS SUPPLIES OF FINANCIAL SERVICES ¶32-300 Background to business-to-business financial services regime Since 1 January 2005, registered suppliers of financial services have been able to elect that their business-to-business supplies of financial services are zero-rated if the customer is GST registered and makes taxable supplies of 75% or more of all total supplies. Such an election enables the suppliers to claim an input tax deduction on goods and services they buy. Usually financial services are exempt supplies for GST purposes, and the supplier is therefore not permitted to claim an input tax deduction for goods and services they buy. This concession is intended to provide relief from overtaxation for taxpayers who provide financial services and aims to encourage financial services providers to outsource essential activities, thereby improving the efficiency of resources. The regime is discussed in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 1, February 2004 at 26.  ¶32-310 Election to apply zero-rating under business-tobusiness regime for GST Section 20F(1) states that a registered person may give notice to the Commissioner to zero-rate the business-to-business supply of financial services (for example, dealing with money, certain securities or the provision of credits and loans). This section enables a “person” rather than just a “GST registered person” to elect to zero-rate supplies of financial services to businesses. An election applies for the taxable period in which the Commissioner receives the notice and for subsequent taxable periods until the election is cancelled. If an election is cancelled, the effective date of the cancellation is from the end of the taxable period: ▪ in which the registered person ceases to have a taxable activity (unless an earlier cancellation period applies) ▪ that is nominated in the cancellation notice, if the notice of cancellation nominates a taxable period after which the cancellation is to be effective, or ▪ in which the Commissioner receives the notice, if the notice of cancellation does not nominate a taxable period. Law: GST s 20F  ¶32-320 Zero-rating under business-to-business regime for GST Registered suppliers may zero-rate the supply of financial services if: ▪ an election has been made to do so (see ¶32-310), and ▪ the financial services are made to a registered person who makes taxable supplies of goods and services of at least 75% of  the total value of the supplies made in a 12-month period that includes the taxable period (or a period acceptable to the Commissioner), or ▪ the financial services are supplied to a person who is a member of a group of companies and the group makes taxable supplies of at least 75% of the total value of the supplies made in a 12month period that includes the taxable period (or a period acceptable to the Commissioner) to persons who are not members of the group. When establishing whether a person qualifies under the 75% test, all taxable supplies made by the recipient should be considered. However, the 75% taxable supply threshold excludes any businessto-business zero-rated supplies. When determining the level of business-to-business zero-rated supplies made by the recipient of the financial service, the supplier must use either actual figures or an estimate made by a method that has been approved by the Commissioner. The Commissioner has issued guidelines on this matter: see “GST guidelines for working with the new zero-rating rules for financial services”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 10, November 2004 at 54. Generally, the zero-rating of the supply of financial services cannot be applied to supplies made to registered persons who make exempt supplies of more than 25% of their total supplies or where the services are supplied to unregistered persons (or final consumers). Law: GST ss 11A(1)(q), (r), (6), 20E  ¶32-330 Input tax credits under business-to-business regime for GST No secondhand goods input tax credits are allowed for the purchase of certain goods where those goods are used to make zero-rated supplies of financial services. Generally, the prohibition applies to  goods that have previously been owned or used by the financial services provider, or by a person associated with the financial services provider. A person who makes a supply of financial services to another financial services supplier cannot usually zero-rate that supply. This is because of the requirement that the recipient makes at least 75% taxable supplies. However, special rules might apply to permit a “direct supplier deduction”. The supplier must satisfy the following criteria: ▪ be a registered person ▪ have elected into the business-to-business and direct supplier deduction regime, and ▪ supply financial services to another supplier of financial services. The rules allow a deduction for supplies to “each direct supplier”. Generally, the amount of the credit is the ratio of taxable to nontaxable supplies made by the recipient financial services provider. The ratio is applied to the input tax credit that would be allowed to the first supplier if all of the supplies of financial services were taxable supplies. A formula is provided for the calculation in s 20C. The total value of the recipient financial services provider’s taxable and non-taxable supplies is determined by the GST return that person has filed (ie the actual figures as shown in the recipient’s return). The formula is intended to allow a deduction to the supplier to reflect the level of taxable supplies made by the recipient. It is important to note that the recipient must not be solely in the business of supplying financial services to other financial institutions. For example, if a financial broker supplies financial services to a financial institution that in turn only makes supplies to other financial institutions, the broker cannot claim a direct supplier deduction. However, the deduction can apply if the broker makes a supply to a financial institution that makes supplies of financial services to nonfinancial institutions.  For more detail on the workings of the formula see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 1, February 2005 at 83 and Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 85. Law: GST ss 3A(2)(c), 20(3)(h), 20C, 20D  ¶32-340 Value of supply under business-to-business regime for GST A special value of supply rule may apply to the supply of a financial service that is zero rated or if the provider of the financial service claims an input tax credit for a financial service supplied to another financial services provider (see ¶32-330). In either of these cases, the value of the supply is its open market value if: ▪ the supply is made for more than the open market value, and ▪ the supplier and the recipient are associated persons. This is an anti-avoidance measure to stop any over-valuation of supplies of financial services made between associated persons. Law: GST s 10(3B)  IMPORTED SERVICES ¶32-400 Background to reverse charge mechanism for GST and imported services Before 2005, imported goods were generally subject to GST (in the form of GST on importation), but imported services were not. The reverse charge mechanism was introduced to address this imbalance, which was highlighted by the increased activity in the digital products area and the rapid growth in electronic commerce. It was also implemented to reduce competitive distortions, enabling identical supplies of services to be treated the same regardless of the origin of supply.  The reverse charge mechanism treats imported services (supplied by a non-resident to a resident) as if they were taxable supplies made in New Zealand. However, the recipient of the services is liable for the output tax for the supply, rather than the supplier. The reverse charge provisions are applicable mainly to those taxpayers making exempt supplies, such as banks or other registered suppliers of financial services (see ¶32-044). However, it also applies to unregistered taxpayers if the level of imported services exceeds the $60,000 GST registration threshold. The reverse charge rules as originally implemented are discussed in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 1, February 2004 at 32 and Inland Revenue published guidelines for working with the rules in October 2004 in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 10, November 2004 at 71. Note that the reverse charge rules were amended from 1 April 2011 as a consequence of the introduction of the apportionment rules in ss 21 to 21H, see ¶32-088. The amendments tied the use of imported services to the defined terms “percentage intended use” and “percentage actual use” (which relate to the intended or actual use for making taxable supplies as a percentage of total use) to ensure that appropriate apportionment of imported services takes place following the introduction of the apportionment rules. From 1 October 2016, overseas suppliers are required to register and return GST when they supply remote services (including online products such as e-books, music and videos) to New Zealand consumers. An amendment to s 8(4B) extended the existing reverse charge to supplies of remote services that are not treated as being made in New Zealand under s 8(4) and (4D). The reverse charge applies if the percentage intended or actual use of the services for making taxable supplies is less than 95% of the total use. The reverse charge treats the services as being made in New Zealand by the recipient in the course and furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by the recipient (see s 5B). A new reverse charge also applies in relation to zero-rated supplies received by a registered person.  Section 20(3JC) requires the recipient of a remote service that is zero-rated under s 11A(1)(j) or (x) to return output tax on the nominal GST component for any non-taxable use of the services. Consistent with s 8(4B), this section will only apply when at the time of acquisition, or at the end of an adjustment period, the taxable use of the service is less than 95%. See discussion at ¶32-067. With effect from 1 December 2019, the reverse charge under s 8(4B) has also been amended to require GST-registered recipients of supplies of distantly taxable goods (that are treated by s 8(4E) as not being supplies in New Zealand) to return output tax on the supply if the percentage intended or actual taxable use of the goods is less than 95% of the total use. The amendment also extends the reverse charge to business-to-business supplies of goods that are not in New Zealand at the time of supply (that are treated by s 8(4) as not being supplies in New Zealand). See further at ¶32-064.  ¶32-410 The reverse charge mechanism for GST and imported services Section 8(4B) applies to imported services (supplied by a nonresident to a resident) when the recipient of the supply: ▪ estimates at the time of acquisition that the percentage intended taxable use of the services is less than 95%, or ▪ determines at the end of an adjustment period that the percentage actual taxable use is less than 95%, and ▪ the supply would be a taxable supply if made in New Zealand by a registered person in the course of their taxable activity. The other key provision, s 5B, treats the supply of imported services to which s 8(4B) applies as having been made by the recipient in the course or furtherance of a taxable activity carried on by the recipient. Therefore, the value of imported services supplied to a person will be included in the total value of supplies made by that person for determining liability to register for GST under s 51. Although  businesses making exempt supplies in New Zealand will usually be registered for GST in any event, the reverse charge may require others to register — in particular, any person importing services exceeding the GST registration threshold in a 12-month period as a private consumer. Section DB 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007 provides that GST output tax on services that are subject to the reverse charge rules for imported services is available as a deduction for income tax purposes (provided the underlying services were also deductible). Law: GST ss 5B, 8(4B), 9(2)(h), 11A(1B); IT07 s DB 2  ¶32-415 Allocation of costs treated as taxable supply for GST An allocation of costs by a non-resident to a resident is treated as a taxable supply of services. The amount provided to the non-resident by the resident under the allocation is treated as being the consideration for the supply. See s 8(4C). This provision is targeted at services provided by an overseas parent company to its subsidiaries, where a proportion of the costs of the services are allocated to each subsidiary as a global sum. If the overseas parent and the New Zealand subsidiary are members of a group of companies, the amount of the charge will exclude any salary and interest costs. The provision is intended to ensure that items such as management fees are treated on the same basis as internally generated services. See s 10(15C) and ¶32-440. Law: GST ss 8(4C), 10(15C)  ¶32-416 Zero-rating of imported services for GST Imported services may be zero-rated if the requirements in s 11A are satisfied. The one exception applies to services physically performed outside New Zealand or the arranging of such services, refer to s 11A(1)(j). This is to ensure that the GST treatment of imported services is the same as services supplied in New Zealand.  Services that are physically performed outside New Zealand will be taxed at 15% unless the nature of the services is such that they can be received only at the time and place at which the services are physically performed. By contrast, services that are intangible in nature, such as the provision of a legal opinion or feasibility study offshore, cannot be zero-rated because such services cannot be regarded as necessarily wholly consumed offshore. See s 11A(1B) regarding the non-application of s 11A(1)(j) and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 10, November 2004 at 71. Law: GST s 11A  ¶32-420 Time of supply of imported services for GST The time of supply for imported services is generally the earlier of invoice or payment. If the service is performed by an associated person, the time of supply is the earlier of invoice or payment or the end of the taxable period that includes the date that is two months after the recipient’s first balance date that follows the completion of the performance of the services. Where the 95% percentage actual use test under s 8(4B)(b)(ii) is the trigger for the liability, the time of supply is the last day of the adjustment period in which the percentage falls below 95%. See s 9(2)(h). An “adjustment period” is the period in which an adjustment for apportioned supplies is required for assets that have a mixed use. Example: A (a resident) and B (a non-resident) are associated persons. A’s balance date is 30 June. A is GST registered on an invoice basis with two-monthly periods ending on December, February, April, June, August and October. B supplies services to A that are completed on 20 July 20X7 and these supplies, if made in New Zealand by a registered person, would be subject to GST at the standard rate. A estimates that the percentage intended taxable use of the services is less than 95%. No invoice has been issued by B for the supply and no payment has been made by A in relation to the supply. The time of supply for the reverse charge is 31 August 20X8. If a payment had been made or an invoice had been issued before 30 June 20X8, the time of supply would be the date on which the invoice was issued or the payment was made.  Law: GST s 9(1), (2)(a)(iv), (h)  ¶32-430 Value of supply of imported services for GST The value of the supply for imported services is the GST-exclusive amount of the consideration for the supply. For imported services provided by associated persons, the value of the supply will generally be its market value, except when the supply is treated as being made in New Zealand or is a supply of remote services and the recipient of the supply can claim a deduction for the expense for income tax purposes (or could have claimed a deduction if consideration had been given). This generally applies to intra-group and inter-branch supplies. For supplies made within a group, the value of the supply excludes salary or wages paid and interest incurred by either the non-resident supplier or other group company. Also see ¶32-440 for companies that are group registered for GST. Law: GST s 10(3C), (3D), (3E), (15C)  ¶32-440 Imported services and group companies, branches and divisions The rule allowing intra-group supplies to be disregarded does not apply to imported services provided by non-residents in the same GST group (see s 55(7) and (7B) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985). Where companies are group-registered for GST, services supplied by a non-resident in the GST group must be included in the nominated company’s GST return. There are also special deeming provisions for taxpayers operating through a branch or a division. A branch or division includes a head office. The deeming provisions are: ▪ each branch or division is treated as a separate person ▪ a branch or division inside New Zealand is treated as being a resident  ▪ a branch or division outside New Zealand is treated as being a non-resident, and ▪ an activity carried on by a branch or division is treated as being carried on separately by the branch or division. The deeming provisions apply whether a branch or division is separately GST-registered or not. A person, or a branch or division of the person that is treated as a separate person, is associated with another branch or division of the person that is treated as a separate person. The practical effect of the deeming provision and the inclusion of intra-group supplies is that once a liability for the reverse charge arises, there are no exceptions. Law: GST ss 2A(1)(bb), 55(7B), 56B  ¶32-450 GST adjustments on changes to the supply of imported services In the case where a contract for the supply of imported services is wholly or partly cancelled or varied, the recipient of the supply must make an adjustment to the amount of output tax paid or input tax claimed in the return for the GST period in which it becomes apparent that the amount claimed was incorrect. Section 25AA provides that an adjustment must be made to the amount of GST returned and paid or GST deductions made if any of the following events occur: ▪ the supply of services is cancelled ▪ the nature of the supply of services has been fundamentally varied or altered ▪ the previously agreed consideration for the supply of services has been altered (whether because of the offer of a discount or otherwise), or  ▪ the services (or part of the services) supplied have been returned to the non-resident. The adjustment must be made in the return for the taxable period in which it becomes apparent that the output or input tax previously returned was incorrect. Law: GST s 25AA  ¶32-460 GST record-keeping for supplies of imported services The recipient of the imported services is also required to keep sufficient records to enable the following details to be ascertained: ▪ the name and the address of the supplier ▪ the date on which, or the period during which, the supply was received ▪ a description of the services that were supplied ▪ the consideration for the supply ▪ the time by which payment for the supply was required, and ▪ for intra-group services, the amount of the salary or wages and interest incurred that have been excluded from the consideration for the supply, in accordance with s 10(15C)(a), (b). Law: GST s 24B  GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ON LAND TRANSACTIONS ¶32-500 Introduction to GST on land transactions  Although virtually every commercial transaction involving real property will involve consideration of GST implications, there are some exceptions to this rule, for example, exempt supplies, such as the supply of residential accommodation (see ¶32-052). Time of supply Determination of the “time of supply” establishes the taxable period in which the supplier must account for GST to Inland Revenue (IR). The time of supply also fixes the point at which the purchaser can claim an input tax credit for GST charged. The accounting basis adopted by the parties determines the period in which GST must be accounted for or claimed as a deduction. For the invoice basis, the payments basis and the hybrid basis, see ¶32-078. The general time of supply rule states that a supply occurs at the earlier of the time an invoice is issued by the supplier or the recipient and the time any payment is received by the supplier in respect of that supply. In relation to the sale and purchase of land see below at ¶32-510 and ¶32-520. Long-term settlements Special rules apply to payments-based taxpayers involved in longterm settlements where the consideration exceeds $225,000. A vendor involved in such a settlement must account for GST on an invoice basis rather than a payments basis (although an exception applies for non-profit bodies — see below). This approach is required if the agreement is not a “short term agreement for the sale and purchase of property or services”. To be a short-term agreement, the general rule is that settlement must take place, or services must be performed, within 365 days of the date on which the agreement is entered into. See s 19D. Section 19D(2B) excludes supplies made by a non-profit body from the application of s 19D(1) if the non-profit body determines on the basis of reasonable information that, at the time of supply, the recipient: ▪ is not GST registered, and  ▪ is either not intending to use the goods and services for the purposes of carrying on a taxable activity, or intending to use the goods and services for the purposes of carrying on a taxable activity only after the full payment for the supply is paid to the supplier. (If the recipient is intending to use the goods or services in a taxable activity, then the non-profit body can still account for GST on a payments basis provided that the recipient only intends to use the goods in a taxable activity once payment has been made.) Land compulsorily acquired In response to confusion over whether an input tax deduction is allowed when land is compulsorily acquired, IR released “Questions we’ve been asked” QB 13/03: “Goods and services tax — whether a compulsory acquisition of land is a ‘supply by way of sale’ ” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 7, August 2013 at 97). The QWBA answers the question whether: ▪ a compulsory acquisition of land under the Public Works Act 1981 (PWA 1981) is a “supply” for GST purposes, and ▪ if so, whether it is a “supply by way of sale” such that the recipient is entitled to a secondhand goods input tax deduction under ss 3A(2) and 20(3) where the supplier is not registered. IR concludes: ▪ A compulsory acquisition of land under the PWA 1981 is a “supply” for GST purposes from the land owner to the Crown or local authority. Where such a supply is made by a registered person, it will generally be zero-rated under s 11(1)(mb). ▪ Land compulsorily acquired from a non-registered person under the PWA 1981 will be a “supply by way of sale” for ss 3A(2) and 20(3). The recipient (the Crown or local authority) will be entitled to an input tax deduction for the amount paid for the acquisition  of that land (provided the other requirements of ss 3A(2) and 20(3) are met). IR notes that while the QWBA analyses compulsory acquisitions under the PWA 1981, the above answer also applies to compulsory acquisitions of land under the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011. Note that in response to some confusion over the correct rate of GST to be charged on legal services provided to owners of land that is being compulsorily acquired, IR released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 16/02, “GST — What is the correct rate of GST to charge on legal services provided to New Zealand resident owners of land being compulsorily acquired?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 4, May 2016 at 26). The PWA 1981 provides that the owner of land compulsorily taken can recover reasonable legal costs incurred. The argument made for zero-rating the legal services was that the supply of the land was the only supply made by the land owner to which the compensation for the legal fees incurred could relate. Because the supply of the land to the relevant body would be zero-rated under s 11(1)(mb), so should the supply of legal services. The item concludes that this argument is incorrect. When the legal services are supplied by a GST-registered person, GST will be charged under s 8(1) at the standard rate of 15%. Because the supply made by the legal professional wholly consists of legal advice or other related services (and does not wholly or partly consist of land), s 11(1)(mb) is not relevant and the supply is not zero-rated. The same conclusion will apply to the supply of other services, such as valuation or surveying services, in these circumstances. The same conclusion will also apply to legal fees paid in respect of compulsory acquisitions of land from New Zealand-resident owners under the Canterbury Earthquake Authority Act 2011 and the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016. Law: GST ss 2(1), 9(1), 19D  ¶32-505 Compulsory zero-rating of land transactions (CZR rules) Transactions between GST-registered parties involving land or in which land is a component must be zero-rated. The stated aim of these compulsory zero-rating of land (CZR) rules is to prevent “phoenix” fraud schemes that involve Inland Revenue (IR) refunding GST to the purchaser with no corresponding payment being made by the vendor because the supplying company deliberately winds up before making payment. The zero-rating rule applies where the purchaser intends to use the land to make taxable supplies: see s 11(1)(mb). Section 11(8B) clarifies that whether the supply of the land is to be zero-rated will depend on whether the relevant tests are met at the time of settlement of the transaction. Section 11(8D)(a) ensures that assignments or surrender of leases can be zero-rated if the rules are met. Section 11(8D)(ab) ensures that the surrender of a right to a payment under an agreement is a supply of land that may be zerorated. Thus, the landlord’s surrender of their contractual right to payment is a supply of land and ensures a supply from landlord to tenant, as part of a lease surrender arrangement, is able to be zerorated if the rules are met. However, under s 11(8D)(b), a supply of an interest in land will not be zero-rated under s 11(1)(mb) even if the rules are met if: ▪ the supply is made under an agreement providing for periodic payments, and ▪ payments under the lease that are not regular rent payments are anticipated, when the agreement is entered into, to be 25% or less of the consideration specified in the agreement, and the relevant payment (and payments made before that payment) is 25% or less of the consideration, and  ▪ the term consideration is treated as the consideration under the agreement for supplies anticipated to be made during the period that is the longer of one year and the shortest possible fixed term of the agreement. If a payment does in fact exceed 25% of the consideration (for example, if it is a contingent payment, or an unquantified payment), then that payment and future payments under the lease will be zerorated. Example: Jared makes regular payments under a commercial lease agreement. These payments are standard-rated and are not subject to the zero-rating rules. At some point, a large, irregular payment is made that exceeds 25% of the consideration specified under the lease agreement. Consequently, the payment is subject to GST at 0%, and all future payments under the lease are also zero-rated. However, the payment does not alter the GST treatment of the past supplies made under the lease agreement. Therefore, previous payments made under the lease remain subject to GST at 15%. Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 86.  Section 11(8D)(c) ensures that a supply of an interest in land by way of a procurement by a third party of an existing lease (such as in a business sale) is subject to the CZR rules. Note that an amendment in March 2017 clarified that the CZR rules apply to arrangements when a lease is novated and where, by agreement of all parties, an existing lease between landlord and tenant is replaced with a new lease between the landlord and a new tenant and the incoming tenant provides consideration to the outgoing tenant. The amendment applies retrospectively from the date the original section applied, namely 30 June 2014, unless a taxpayer has taken an inconsistent tax position for a supply in a return before 30 March 2017. The CZR rules do not apply to a supply of land intended to be used as a principal place of residence of the purchaser or their relative (s 11(1)(mb)(ii)). This is to ensure that GST-registered sole traders  cannot zero-rate the purchase of their family home. Note that in circumstances where a principal place of residence forms part of a larger supply of land, the supply of the residence will be deemed to be a separate supply from the supply of the other land (s 5(15) and ¶32-555). The definition of “land” in s 2(1) includes an estate or interest in land, a right that gives rise to an interest in land, an option to acquire land or an interest in land, or shares in flat-owning or office-owning companies. The definition does not include mortgages or the lease of a dwelling. Do certain supplies wholly or partly consist of land? In December 2020, IR released a QWBA, QB 20/04, “Do certain supplies wholly or partly consist of land for the compulsory zerorating (CZR) rules?”. The item considers several different supplies and concludes that the following supplies consist wholly or partly of land for the CZR rules: ▪ the grant of an easement, and ▪ the sale by way of assignment of a purchaser’s interest in a sale and purchase agreement for land where that agreement gives rise to an equitable interest in land. However, the item also concludes that the following supplies do not wholly or partly consist of land for the CZR rules: ▪ the sale of transferable development rights (which are rights created by various district councils throughout New Zealand), and ▪ the sale by way of assignment of a purchaser’s interest in a sale and purchase agreement for land where that agreement does not give rise to an equitable interest in land. Where services are provided as part of a transaction involving land, the supply of the services is treated as a supply of goods for the purposes of s 11(1)(mb): s 5(24). For a discussion on whether  transitional services provided by the vendor as part of the sale of a business (that includes the supply of land) will be zero-rated for GST purposes where: ▪ the services and the sale of the business form part of the same contractual arrangement, and ▪ the services are not provided for a separately identifiable consideration, see IR’s QB 12/07, “Goods and services tax — treatment of transitional services supplied as part of the sale of a business (that includes the supply of land)” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 6, July 2012 at 65). ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes a number of remedial amendments to ensure the CZR rules that apply to leases of land work as intended. The proposed amendments will: ▪ ensure all assignments or surrenders of a lease agreement for land that meet the criteria in s 11(1)(mb) are zero-rated ▪ clarify that, in the context of business sales involving a zero-rated supply relating to land leases, any business assets that are transferred as part of the same supply or arrangement should also be zero-rated, and ▪ provide that compulsory zero-rating will apply when a lease is cancelled by the lessor and the previous lessee arranges a new lease for a new lessee. Although all of the proposed amendments are intended to apply retrospectively from 30 June 2014, a savings provision is also proposed to preserve tax positions taken under the existing provisions before the proposed amendments are enacted. Information obligations: purchaser — s 78F  Section 78F provides that the obligation for providing information on whether zero-rating is applicable will rest solely with the purchaser of the land. The purchaser must provide a written statement to the vendor before settlement regarding the purchaser’s GST-registered status and intended use of the land. When the ultimate recipient is a person nominated by the contractual purchaser to the agreement for sale and purchase (a nominee), it is the nominee’s registration status and intentions in relation to the land that must be used to determine the GST treatment of the supply. The information requirements in s 78F(2) are met if either the contractual purchaser or the nominated person provide the required information in relation to the nominated person. In the case of the agent of an undisclosed principal, the information requirements are met if the agent notifies the supplier as to whether, at the date of settlement, the principal as recipient is, or expects to be, a registered person, is acquiring the goods or services with the intention of using them for making taxable supplies, and does not intend to use the land as a principal place of residence: s 78F(6). The agent must provide their registration number to the supplier at or before the date of settlement. If, however, the agent is unregistered, their tax file number may be provided in place of the registration number: s 78F(7). If a supply of land is made by a lender in satisfaction of a debt, the purchaser must provide the information required by s 78F to the lender rather than to the borrower, eg the mortgagee under a mortgagee sale. Information obligations: supplier/agent — ss 75(3B)–(3E), 78F Section 78F(3) clarifies that the supplier can rely entirely on the information provided by the purchaser in determining the tax treatment of the supply. There is no obligation for the supplier to verify the information provided by the purchaser. However, where the supplier comes to believe that the information provided is incorrect, the supplier may use the GST treatment he or she believes to be correct. For example, if a purchaser states that a property will not be  used as a principal place of residence but the supplier comes to understand that this is incorrect, the supplier may choose not to zero-rate the transaction. Where a transaction is zero-rated, the supplier is required to maintain sufficient records to enable the following details of the supply to be established: ▪ The name, address and registration number of the purchaser. ▪ A description of the land. ▪ The consideration for the supply. See s 75(3B). Section 75(3C)–(3E) provides that where land is supplied to an agent acting for an undisclosed principal, the supplier must maintain the name, address and registration number or tax file number of the agent and the agent must maintain the name, address and registration number of the principal. Correction of GST treatment before settlement Before settlement, the parties may become aware that the GST treatment applied to the transaction is not correct. However, because the crystallisation of the GST treatment occurs at the time of settlement there is no obligation on the parties to change the initial GST treatment. Nevertheless, the parties may voluntarily agree to correct the GST treatment to avoid the consequence of being incorrect. When a supply that should have been zero-rated is incorrectly standard-rated and the GST has been accounted for to IR, the supplier will be required to use the credit note mechanism in s 25 to deduct the GST paid in respect of the supply. The purchaser will then be required to account for output tax in relation to any amount of input tax that they have incorrectly claimed in respect of the supply. Generally, the purchaser will not be able to claim a deduction in respect of the supply since if they are registered for GST and intend to use the goods in making taxable supplies (requirements for  obtaining a deduction), standard-rating is unlikely to be the correct treatment. Section 25 explicitly allows suppliers to issue debit and credit notes in the context of the zero-rating rules. Correction of GST treatment after settlement When at any time after a transaction is settled it is found that the supply should have been standard-rated rather than zero-rated, s 5(23) treats the purchaser as making a supply of the goods at the standard rate. This means the purchaser is liable for the GST on the supply. The value of the supply will be equal to the amount of the consideration for the original supply (s 10(7B)). Since the supply is treated as being made at the date of settlement, the purchaser may be subject to use of money interest with any applicable penalties calculated from that date. If the purchaser who is required to account for tax under s 5(23) is not registered for GST, they will be treated as registered from the date of the supply under s 5(23) and must apply to be GST registered: see s 51B(4). Section 20(4B) denies a deduction to the person who is treated under s 5(23) as a supplier of goods. However, the person may be able to claim a deduction for the supply if they are registered or later become registered for GST and use the relevant goods for making taxable supplies. Once GST is accounted for, the purchaser may request that the Commissioner cancel their registration under s 51B(5). Providing the request for cancellation of registration is made by the end of the taxable period in which the deemed output tax is returned to IR, or IR agrees that s 5(3) does not apply, then the deemed disposal of goods and services forming part of the assets of the taxable activity that would normally occur on deregistration (under s 5(3)) will not occur in accordance with s 51B(6). ▸Note: In February 2021, Inland Revenue released a draft QWBA, PUB00256, “When does s 5(23) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 apply to shift GST liability to the purchaser of land?”. The draft  item considers the application of s 5(23). In particular, the draft item considers the issue of whether s 5(23) will apply where the vendor zero-rates the transaction in their GST return either: ▪ contrary to what the purchaser has told them about their GST circumstances, or ▪ when the purchaser has not provided enough information under s 78F for the vendor to determine the correct treatment. The Commissioner’s view is that the unilateral action of a vendor zero-rating a land sale in their GST return would not result in the GST liability being shifted to the purchaser under s 5(23). The Commissioner considers that s 5(23) can only apply where the parties have contractually agreed that the supply will be zero-rated under s 11(1)(mb), but it is determined after settlement that s 11(1) (mb) doesn’t apply because the parties’ GST information turns out to be incorrect, and the supply should have been standard-rated. Note also that the draft item states that a remedial amendment is proposed to be included in an upcoming tax Bill to ensure s 5(23) won’t apply to shift GST liability to the purchaser if the transaction has been incorrectly zero-rated when it was in fact a non-taxable supply (for example, if the vendor is retrospectively deregistered effective from a date before settlement of the sale). This proposed amendment will be referred to in the finalised QWBA, as it will be in a Bill by that stage. Non-profit bodies As a result of the deeming rule in s 20(3K) (see ¶32-048), non-profit bodies are generally able to recover all GST they incur, except to the extent they incur the GST in making exempt supplies. This enables them to recover GST that relates to a non-profit activity that is not a taxable activity. However, the compulsory zero-rating of land rules do not apply in this way, and before 30 March 2017, a non-profit body acquiring land outside the course of their taxable activity was required to recover the GST it incurred.  With effect from 30 March 2017, s 11(8D)(d) provides that, for the purposes of the compulsory zero-rating of land rules, a New Zealand resident GST-registered non-profit body is treated as acquiring the goods (ie the land) with the intention of using them in their taxable activity, except to the extent it is acquiring it for making exempt supplies. This means that the non-profit body is able to provide a s 78F statement, and the supply may be zero-rated. Where the nonprofit body is using the goods partially to make exempt supplies, it may be required to account for output tax under s 20(3J) for the amount of GST it would have incurred that it could not have deducted. Mortgagee sales of land The zero-rating of the supply of land also extends to mortgagee sales. Under the GST Act mortgagees who hold security over land owned by registered persons are liable to IR for the full amount of GST output tax on mortgagee sales: see Edgewater Motel Ltd v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,664 (PC). By contrast, where the sale is effected by the registered person themselves (even in constrained circumstances and simply to prevent a mortgagee sale), the (often impecunious) vendor remains liable to IR for the GST output tax: see Christchurch Readymix Concrete Ltd v Rob Mitchell Builders Ltd (in liq) (2003) 21 NZTC 18,033. This different GST treatment created an incentive for mortgagees to facilitate or force a sale by the defaulting borrower in what amounted to a mortgagee sale in all but name, and therefore gave rise to GST avoidance opportunities. To prevent this loss to the revenue most mortgagee sales of land (or sales including land) must also be zero-rated. Section 5(22) provides that if the supply by the debtor would be zero-rated under s 11(1) (mb), the creditor must zero-rate the supply in the same way. As with all registered taxpayers selling land, the mortgagee must obtain a written declaration from the purchaser that it is GST registered and intends to use the land as part of a taxable activity. Only where the sale is made to an unregistered consumer or to a registered person for their private or exempt purposes will the mortgagee sale have to be standard-rated. In practice, most mortgagee sales of land subject to GST will be to a registered person for use in a taxable activity. The  effect is therefore that mortgagees can no longer rely upon the additional GST from the proceeds of sale to satisfy the loan secured by their mortgage. Commissioner’s interpretation statement In September 2017, the Commissioner released interpretation statement, IS 17/08, “GST — compulsory zero-rating of land rules (general application)” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 10, November 2017 at 17), which provides a general overview of the compulsory zero-rating of land (CZR) rules, including practical examples of how the CZR rules work. The statement’s focus is on helping vendors and purchasers get it right from the start, before a land transaction settles. The statement contains a flowchart for determining if a supply including land is compulsorily zero-rated, a table summarising the rules for correcting the GST treatment of incorrectly rated land transactions, and a number of examples. Law: GST ss 5(2), (15), (22)–(24), 10(7B), 11(1)(mb), (8B), (8D), 20(4B), 25, 51B(4)–(6), 75(3B)–(3E), 78F  ¶32-510 Invoices and real property transactions for GST The time of supply for GST purposes can be triggered by the issuing of an invoice. See s 9(1). There has always been some question as to whether a sale and purchase agreement itself constitutes an “invoice” for the purposes of s 9(1) and therefore can trigger the time of supply. An invoice is defined as “a document notifying an obligation to make payment”. See s 2(1) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 (GST Act). This is different to a “tax invoice”, which is also a defined term in s 2(1). In June 2007 Inland Revenue changed its policy, releasing interpretation statement IS 07/02, “Is an agreement for the sale and purchase of property an ‘invoice’ for GST purposes?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 7, August 2007 at 7). The statement considers that an agreement for the sale and purchase of real estate does not generally constitute an “invoice” for the purposes of the GST Act. The agreement does not notify an “obligation to make  payment”; at most it notifies only a contingent obligation to make payment. This is the case regardless of whether the agreement is conditional, becomes unconditional or is unconditional. Accordingly, to satisfy the invoice time of supply rule in s 9(1) another document notifying an obligation to make payment must be issued by the supplier or the supplier’s agent. In IS 07/02 the Commissioner relied on Shell New Zealand Holding Co Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,163 (CA), in which it was found that an import entry form was an invoice and did trigger the time of supply. The Commissioner decided that: ▪ the definition of “invoice” should be given an ordinary meaning ▪ an agreement for sale and purchase is a contract, and does not have the characteristics of an invoice, based on the ordinary meaning of the term ▪ an agreement for sale and purchase is not a demand or request for payment, and ▪ an agreement for sale and purchase does not fulfil the requirements of “notifying” and “issuing”, as those terms would ordinarily mean. The Commissioner also noted in IS 07/02 that the definition of invoice created a cumulative requirement and the fact that a document may appear to satisfy one of the requirements does not mean it meets the definition’s meaning as a whole. In Case 10/2014 (2014) 26 NZTC ¶2-020, the taxpayer issued a document headed “GST Tax invoice” on 29 September 2010 in an attempt to trigger the time of supply under a sale and purchase agreement before the GST rate increased on 1 October 2010. The Taxation Review Authority held the document was not an “invoice”, as an obligation to make payment did not arise under the terms of the agreements while they remained conditional on the deposit of the survey plan and issue of individual certificates of title. There was no  debt then due to the taxpayer and there were still matters to be completed before any debt became due. Law: GST ss 2(1), 9(1), 24(1); TAA s 143  ¶32-520 Payment and real property transactions for GST The receipt of payment before the issue of an invoice generates a time of supply for the purposes of s 9(1) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. For real property transactions, this is when the deposit is applied to the benefit of the vendor. The Commissioner clarified the time of supply rules on the receipt of a deposit in interpretation statement IS 10/03, “GST: Time of supply — payments of deposits, including to a stakeholder”, issued on 4 June 2010 and published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 6, July 2010 at 7. The interpretation statement provides that, where no invoice has been issued, the receipt of a deposit will generally trigger the time of supply in both conditional and unconditional contracts. However, the time of supply will not be triggered where the deposit for a supply is received by a person as a stakeholder. Deposit paid under an unconditional contract A deposit paid under an unconditional contract is generally considered to fall within the wording of “any payment” in s 9(1) and will therefore trigger the GST time of supply. This position has been stated by the courts on numerous occasions in a GST context. For example, in Rob Mitchell Builder Ltd (in liq) v National Bank of New Zealand Ltd (2004) 21 NZTC 18,397 (CA) and Cockburn v CS Development No 2 Ltd (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-007 (SC). Conditional contracts Inland Revenue (IR) accepts that a conditional contract per se does not constitute an invoice for GST purposes. See ¶32-510. Deposit paid under a conditional contract  A deposit paid under a conditional contract is usually paid to a third party, such as a real estate agent or the vendor’s solicitors, who holds it under the terms of the agreement as a stakeholder. Stakeholder capacity usually continues until the contract goes unconditional. IR considers that the receipt of a non-refundable deposit under a conditional contract triggers the time of supply. However, this will not be the case where that deposit is paid to a stakeholder and cannot be applied to the supplier’s benefit until the happening of a specific event, ie the contract is rendered unconditional with stakeholder capacity being lost (the deposit is deemed to be received by the vendor at this point in time). See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 6, July 2010 at 12. In C of IR v Dormer (1997) 18 NZTC 13,446 (HC), Salmon J took the view that a deposit will not be received as long as any person holds it as stakeholder, whether that person is the supplier or an independent third party. Naturally, whether this argument can be used will depend on the terms of the contract dictating the capacity in which a person holds the funds. For example, in Dormer it was clear from the contract that the deposit was no longer held by the stakeholder once the contract became unconditional. In Case 10/2014 (2014) 26 NZTC ¶2-020, deposits were paid to the taxpayer’s lawyers as stakeholder under the agreements for sale and purchase of the lots. Each of the agreements was conditional on the issue of a certificate of title and satisfying s 225 of the Resource Management Act 1991. The TRA held that the stakeholder status ended when the agreements became unconditional. The deposits were then payable to the taxpayer and, accordingly, the corresponding right to sue for the deposits also arose at that time. The deposits for the lots were then held by the taxpayer’s lawyers as agent for the taxpayer, rather than stakeholder, and the time of supply was triggered. IS 10/03 confirms the position that the stakeholder can be a third party or the supplier. Where the stakeholder is a third party, the essential requirement for a stakeholder relationship is the existence  of an agreement between the parties. In this case, the time of supply will not be triggered until the stakeholder applies the deposit for the supplier’s benefit. Where the supplier is the stakeholder, the time of supply will not be triggered unless the supplier applies the deposit for his or her benefit. Long-term agreements A deposit in relation to a long-term agreement is generally applied to the benefit of the vendor or the vendor’s agent on the possession date of the realty. This date will generate the time of supply. However, if the deposit is applied to the benefit of the vendor before possession date, the time of supply will be at the time that the deposit is so applied. See Case L67 (1989) 11 NZTC 1,391 and Case N24 (1991) 13 NZTC 3,199. Input tax credit on payment of deposit by payments basis taxpayer If an invoice basis is used, GST is brought to account for the taxable period in which the supply is deemed to be made. This is the earlier of the time an invoice is issued and the time any payment is made. If an invoice is issued first, the person must account for tax in that taxable period even though the person may not have paid or received the relevant GST amount. If the payments basis is adopted, GST is brought to account when and to the extent that payment is made. See ¶32-078. Many payments basis purchasers have been of the view that a full input tax credit for the entire consideration of the sale is available as soon as the GST portion of the purchase price is paid. This view was based on a Taxation Review Authority decision that allowed two GST payments basis purchasers a full input tax claim for the purchase price of land on the payment of a deposit. That decision was overturned by the High Court (C of IR v Nicholls (1997) 18 NZTC 13,265) and the Court of Appeal confirmed the High Court decision in Nicholls v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,233. The net effect is that a GST input tax credit deduction is calculated only to the extent of the deposit actually paid during the relevant period.  Cancelled contract IR has stated the GST consequences of a cancellation of a contract for the sale and purchase of land to be as follows: ▪ the GST effects of entering into the contract will be reversed in the period in which the agreement is cancelled ▪ GST will not be chargeable on the amount of the deposit retained by the vendor, and ▪ the purchaser will not be entitled to an input tax credit on the amount of the deposit. See “Questions we’ve been asked” item in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 4, May 2005 at 26 and QB 14/10, “GST — whether a binding contract always establishes a transaction giving rise to a supply for section 9(1) purposes”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 10, November 2014. See also, Case X12 (2005) 22 NZTC 12,189. Law: GST s 9(1)  ¶32-530 GST and associated persons’ land transactions Special time of supply and valuation rules govern transactions between associated persons. In the case of goods that cannot be removed (eg land) a supply between associated persons is deemed to take place at the time when goods are made available to the recipient, see s 9(2)(a)(ii). Inland Revenue (IR) regards goods as being available when all formalities for the sale have been completed. If s 9(2)(a) applies, a payments basis vendor is required to account for GST output tax in the period the supply is deemed to occur, irrespective of whether or not payment has been made. See s 20(4) (b). The special time of supply rules for associated persons will not apply where an invoice is issued or any payment is made in respect of the  supply on or before the last day for filing of the GST return in which that supply would otherwise have been included. If the supply (not including the supply of a fringe benefit) has been made between associated persons and the value of the supply is for no consideration or for a consideration below market value, “the consideration in money for the supply shall be deemed to be the open market value of that supply”. Example: A taxpayer claimed a GST refund in the period June 1988 based on the purchase of land from an associated person for a price of $356,000. Government valuation as at 1 July 1988 was $218,000. IR considered the valuation to be overstated and the consideration was deemed to be the open market value of that supply. The Authority rejected this and held that s 10(3) only applied where the consideration was below the open market value and did not apply in the circumstances where the consideration was above the open market value. See Case M110 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,704.  Transactions between associated parties under $225,000 Based on the time of supply rules set out above, there is potential for the deferral of GST output tax in cases where a GST payments basis vendor sells an asset to an associated GST invoice basis purchaser. This is on the assumption that the associated purchaser accounts for GST on an invoice basis and claims a GST input tax credit at the time of sale (the registered vendor having issued a GST invoice at that time). The GST-registered vendor, on the other hand, is not obliged to return GST on the sale until payment is received (as long as an invoice has been issued within the requisite period for filing a GST return). The position is different if the value of the transaction exceeds $225,000 (including GST). An invoice basis approach is then required: s 19D (¶32-500). Law: GST ss 9(2)(a), 10(2), (3)  ¶32-540 GST and goods sold to satisfy debt  Under s 5(2) goods sold towards the satisfaction of debts and goods repossessed under a hire purchase agreement are deemed to be supplied in the course of a taxable activity carried on by the debtor. The debtor is deemed to be a registered person. Goods will not be deemed to be supplied in the course of a taxable activity if: ▪ the debtor has supplied the person selling the goods (the creditor) with a written statement stating fully the reasons why that supply would not be a taxable supply, or ▪ in the absence of a written statement from the debtor, the creditor has determined the status of the supply on the basis of any reasonable information held. Example: In a mortgagee sale, the mortgagee would be required to charge GST on the supply unless the mortgagee can obtain the required information. This will often have significant consequences for a mortgagee who will be looking for the best return and will not wish to have to account for 3/23 of the sale price to Inland Revenue (IR).  Section 5(2) states that goods sold towards the satisfaction of debts are deemed to be supplied in the course of a taxable activity carried on by the debtor. Therefore, mortgagees who hold security over land owned by registered persons are liable to IR for the full amount of GST output tax on mortgagee sales: see Edgewater Motel Ltd v C of IR (2004) 21 NZTC 18,664 (PC) and ¶32-505. However, note that s 5(22) provides that if the supply by the debtor would be zero-rated under s 11(1)(mb), the creditor must zero-rate the supply in the same way. See ¶32-505. Operational statements In September 2017, Inland Revenue released operational statement, OS 17/01, “GST and costs associated with mortgagee sales” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 9, October 2017 at 52). This statement replaced the previous statement, OS 15/01 with effect  from 6 September 2017. The statement sets out the Commissioner’s position on GST input tax claims for the costs of sale associated with mortgagee sales. The statement concludes: ▪ A mortgagee in a mortgagee sale cannot deduct the costs of sale, such as legal fees, valuation fees and real estate advertising and commission, before calculating the GST due under s 17. ▪ A mortgagee cannot claim input tax for the costs associated