 of more than one trust, the person is acting in a different capacity for each trust. In particular, a corporate trustee is not looked-through, including for the purpose of association. Interpretation statement released In June 2018, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 18/01, “Taxation of trusts — income tax” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 7, August 2018 at 17). The statement provides taxpayers with an updated summary of the tax law as it applies to trusts. It replaces the Commissioner’s original explanation of the trust rules in “Appendix: Explanation of Taxation of Trusts”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 1, No 5, November 1989. Broadly, the statement covers the same content as the 1989 explanation covered, but updates legislation, improves the order of the content, and includes new sections, such as a section dealing with the minor beneficiary rules. The statement does not consider the foreign tax credit regime as it applies to trusts, the application of double tax agreements to trusts, or the application of s BG 1, as these are beyond the scope of a general guide. Law: IT07 subparts FC, HC, ss HA 7, OA 8, YA 5, YB 1(3), YC 9  TRUSTEE INCOME ¶25-035 Trustee income Definition The definition of “trustee income” is the same for complying, foreign and non-complying trusts. An amount of income derived by a trustee of a trust is trustee income to the extent that it is not beneficiary income. See s HC 7.  Taxation of trustee income Trustee income derived by a trustee of a complying trust, foreign trust or non-complying trust is taxed at the flat rate of 33%. A trustee is required to satisfy the income tax liability for the taxable income of the trustee as if the trustee is an individual beneficially entitled to that income. One consequence of this is that if the trustee is a company, that fact is ignored in determining the amount of tax for which the trustee is liable. This means that a corporate trustee pays tax, in its capacity as a trustee, at the trustee rate of 33%, not the company rate. See s HC 24(1) and ¶16-025. Deductions A trustee is entitled to claim deductions for amounts incurred in deriving income, and, for these purposes, any amount paid out as beneficiary income is deemed to be income derived by the trustee. This ensures that the expenditure of the trust will be deductible even if all of the income of the trust is distributed as beneficiary income. See s DV 9(2). Legal expenses of $10,000 or less are deductible irrespective of whether they relate to income or capital. See ¶10-680. Legal expenses in excess of $10,000 incurred in making the application to the court will be deductible in the same proportion to which the remuneration is deductible. Legal form of trust relationship must be recognised for tax purposes In Brown v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-089, deductions for interest paid by the taxpayer on behalf of the trustee borrower were denied because the taxpayer did not incur the interest expenditure and there was no nexus between the payments made by the taxpayer and his income-earning activity. There was no contractual obligation on the trust to pay the taxpayer the amount of interest that he had paid on its behalf. A resolution of the trustees could not create a legally enforceable right on the part of the taxpayer to be reimbursed. Trustee of deceased estate may be cash basis person  The trustee for a deceased estate will be a cash basis person for financial arrangements in the estate in the income year in which the death occurred and in each of the four succeeding income years if the deceased was a cash basis person at the time of his or her death and the estate otherwise meets the cash basis person requirements: s EW 60(1), (2). If the trustee of an estate ceases to be a cash basis person at any time during the five-year period, the trustee cannot be a cash basis person in any subsequent year: s EW 60(3). Financial arrangements disposed of by the trustee of a deceased estate must be valued at cost rather than disposed of at market value: s FC 8. Tax credits A trustee can use tax credits such as imputation credits to satisfy the trustee’s income tax liability. However, in determining income tax liability a trustee is not entitled to any tax credits under subpart LC or LD. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 10, November 2010 at 99 and s HC 24(2). Resident withholding tax (RWT) credits can be allocated at the trustee’s discretion. To achieve this a trustee can substitute cash distributions (a substitution payment) to beneficiaries for RWT credits. The trustee is then permitted a credit to the extent that the trustee substitutes cash for RWT credits. See ss LB 3(1), (4), (5), RE 2(7). Example 1: The trustee of the S Trust derives $100.00 interest income ($67.00 cash and $33.00 RWT credit). The trustee resolves to distribute the entire payment to a beneficiary with a marginal tax rate of 17.5%. The trustee pays $67.00 cash to the beneficiary from the interest income received with a further cash payment (the substitution payment) of $15.50 together with $17.50 (of the original $33.00 RWT credit). The tax on $100.00 for this beneficiary is $17.50 so the beneficiary receives cash of $82.50 and the $17.50 RWT credit, and the beneficiary has no further tax liability. The trustee offsets the substitution payment of $15.50 with the balance of the RWT credit of $15.50 and is in a revenue neutral position. For RWT purposes the payment can be demonstrated as follows:  Non-resident passive income Where a non-resident trustee derives non-resident passive income, there will generally be a non-resident withholding tax liability. If trustee income is liable for tax only as non-resident passive income, the trust will not be a complying trust in relation to distributions to beneficiaries. See ¶25-245. Commissioner may determine trustee income The Commissioner may determine the amount of trustee income for the tax year in the following circumstances: ▪ a person has failed to make disclosure of a trust in accordance with s 59 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see ¶25-485) ▪ a person has failed to disclose any information requested by the Commissioner under s 17 of the Tax Administration Act (see ¶1590), or ▪ insufficient information can be obtained to calculate the trustee income of the trust for any tax year. Income of minor beneficiaries Unless an exception applies, trustees must pay tax on beneficiary income derived by minor beneficiaries as if the beneficiary income were trustee income. The rule referred to as the minor beneficiary rule is intended to prevent “income streaming” where income is attributed to minors with more favourable tax rates than say parents.  The rule ensures a 33% tax rate applies to distributions to these minor beneficiaries. See ¶25-045. Foreign-sourced amounts Foreign-sourced amounts derived by non-resident trustee Generally, foreign-sourced amounts derived by non-residents are excluded from assessable income under s BD 1(5). In broad terms, a “foreign-sourced amount” is an amount that is not treated as having a source in New Zealand. However, income derived by a nonresident trustee in an income year from outside New Zealand that is not beneficiary income is included in the income of the trustee if at any time during that income year: ▪ a settlor of the trust is resident in New Zealand and is not a transitional resident ▪ the trust is a superannuation fund, or ▪ any trustee of the trust was resident in New Zealand and the trust is a testamentary trust (ie a trust created by will) or an inter vivos trust, of which a trustee is resident in New Zealand and a settlor died resident in New Zealand or, from 23 March 2020, the last surviving settlor was resident in New Zealand when that settlor ceased to exist (ie a non-natural person settlor). If income derived by a trustee from outside New Zealand is included in a non-resident trustee’s income under s HC 25, then, for the purpose of calculating the trustee’s taxable income, the trustee is deemed not to be non-resident for the purpose of s BD 1(4) and is deemed to be resident for the following purposes: ▪ ss EW 9 and EW 11 (application of the financial arrangements rules) ▪ s LJ 2 (credit for tax paid overseas) ▪ s OE 1 (election to maintain branch equivalent tax account) ▪ the international tax rules.  See s HC 25(6). Example 2: A New Zealand resident settles a trust with non-resident trustees. The trustees derive rental income from a property in Australia. The rental income is included in the trustees’ income for New Zealand tax purposes.  In certain limited circumstances, a non-resident trustee is not taxed on foreign-sourced amounts that might otherwise be included in the trustee’s income under s HC 25. The exception applies where: ▪ either: □ no settlement has been made on the trust after 17 December 1987 (when the current trust rules were introduced), or □ the only settlements made on the trust have been made by settlors who were not resident at the time of settlement or at any time after 17 December 1987 and, in either case, the trustee has not made any election to pay tax on trustee income under s HZ 2 (elections made on or before 31 May 1989 by trusts first settled before 18 December 1987), and ▪ the trustee is resident outside New Zealand at all times during the income year. See s HC 25(3), (4). Note that the exception is limited in its application and does not apply for the purpose of determining whether a trust is a complying trust. See ¶25-245. Foreign-sourced amounts derived by resident trustee Foreign-sourced amounts derived by a New Zealand resident trustee in an income year, and included in trustee income for the year, are  exempt income if: ▪ no settlor of the trust was resident in New Zealand at any time during the income year who is not a transitional resident or, if no settlor exists in the income year, the last surviving settlor was a non-resident when that settlor ceased to exist, and ▪ the trust is not— □ a superannuation fund, or □ a testamentary trust or a trust established during the settlor’s lifetime where any settlor of the trust died resident in New Zealand, and ▪ from 23 March 2020, no election to satisfy the tax liability of the trust has been made under s HC 33 (see ¶25-365), and ▪ for a foreign trust that applies for registration within the period given by s 59C of the Tax Administration Act (see ¶25-488) and is registered by the end of the income year (the post-deadline year) beginning next after the end of the application period— □ the trust has a trust deed □ the income year ends after 21 February 2017 □ for an income year that includes part of the application period or is the post-deadline year, the trust is registered before the end of the post-deadline year and is not deregistered before the foreign-sourced amount is derived □ for an income year beginning after the end of the postdeadline year, the trust is registered when the foreignsourced amount is derived, and □ the trustee complies with its requirements under ss 22, 59B, 59C and 59D of the Tax Administration Act (see ¶1-505 and ¶25-488), and  ▪ for a foreign trust to which the above does not apply— □ the trust has a trust deed □ the trust is registered at the beginning of the income year □ the trust is registered when the foreign-sourced amount is derived, and □ the trustee complies with its requirements under ss 22, 59B, 59C and 59D of the Tax Administration Act (see ¶1-505 and ¶25-488), and ▪ the amount is not minor beneficiary income that is treated as if it were trustee income. For the purposes of determining whether a trustee has complied with its requirements under ss 22, 59B, 59C and 59D, the trustee must comply in the income year or satisfy the Commissioner that it made reasonable efforts to comply in the income year and corrected the failure to comply within a reasonable period of time after the trustee became aware of the failure. See s HC 26(1) and (1B). However, if the disclosure rules for a foreign trust are breached, the exemption from New Zealand tax on foreign-sourced amounts will not apply. For a discussion of the disclosure rules for foreign trusts from 21 February 2017, see ¶25-488. Certain property settlements on to trust are deemed to be trustee income An anti-avoidance provision provides that settlements onto a trust that have the effect of avoiding a tax impost are deemed to be trustee income (s HC 7(3)). Property settled on to a trust from the trustee of another trust is deemed to be trustee income in the hands of the recipient trustee to the extent that the property would represent beneficiary income or a  taxable distribution if distributed to a New Zealand resident beneficiary (s HC 4(3)). Property settled on to a trust for which the settlor is allowed a deduction is deemed to be trustee income (s HC 4(4)). Property settled on to a trust that would, but for the settlement, have constituted settlor income, whether or not the settlor is resident in New Zealand, is also deemed to be trustee income (s HC 4(5)(a) and (c)). Property settlements that are deemed to be trustee income are treated as income derived by the trustee in the income year corresponding to the settlement and are excluded from the definition of corpus. It has been clarified that when a settlement is excluded from corpus it is included in trustee income for the income year in which the settlement occurred unless the income is distributed to a beneficiary in the same income year. If the trustee distributes this income as beneficiary income or a taxable distribution in the same income year, the amount of trustee income for a settlement excluded from corpus will be reduced by the amount of that distribution. Debt forgiveness and family trusts There can be tax consequences for a trustee if a debt owing to that trustee is forgiven. In certain circumstances, the trustee is deemed to have income to the extent that a distribution is less than, or equal to, the total amount of debts forgiven by the creditor. See ¶6-420. Law: IT07 ss BD 1(4), (5), CV 13, CW 54, DB 62, DV 9(2), EW 60, HC 4, HC 7, HC 24–HC 26, LB 3, RE 2, YA 1, sch 1 pt A cl 3; TAA s 93B  ¶25-045 Trustee income — minor beneficiary rule Subject to certain exceptions, beneficiary income derived by a minor is taxed as trustee income at the trustee rate of 33%, irrespective of the beneficiary’s marginal rate. The rules that apply to the taxation of  minor beneficiary income are referred to as the minor beneficiary rule. However, as the minor beneficiary rule relates to the nature of settlements, rather than the fact of payment to a minor, it can be possible to avoid the application of the rule by ensuring settlements are made on to trusts that are not subject to the rule. The minor beneficiary rule was introduced to prevent “income streaming” whereby income is attributed to minors with a more favourable tax rate, rather than to (usually) parents. Minor beneficiaries are generally taxed at the trustee rate Unless an exclusion applies, beneficiary income derived by minor beneficiaries is taxed at the trustee rate (currently 33%). Income subject to the minor beneficiary rule is treated as trustee income and is not included in the minor beneficiary’s income, ie is excluded income of the minor. Income distributed to minor beneficiaries should therefore be included in the trust tax return as trustee income and not as beneficiary income on the IR 6B or in any return of the minors. See Inland Revenue newsletter, AGENTS answers, Issue 46, June 2003. Who is a minor? For the purposes of the minor beneficiary rule a minor is a natural person who is a New Zealand resident and who is under 16 years of age, on the trust’s balance date for the income year. The minor beneficiary rule applies to beneficiary income distributed from complying, non-complying or foreign trusts. However, under current legislation it would appear that the rule may result in foreignsourced income distributed from foreign and non-complying trusts to New Zealand resident minor beneficiaries escaping the New Zealand tax net altogether. This is because a trustee is generally required to return foreign-sourced income in New Zealand only if a settlor of the trust is resident in New Zealand. See ¶25-035. Accordingly, foreignsourced income distributed from a foreign trust (for example) to a New Zealand resident minor beneficiary as beneficiary income may not be taxable in New Zealand either as trustee income or  beneficiary income. The trustee, who is required to pay tax on the income as if it were trustee income, may not be taxable in New Zealand on foreign-sourced trustee income because no settlor of the trust is resident in New Zealand and the income is deemed not to be income of the minor beneficiary. There are exclusions from the minor beneficiary rule The minor beneficiary rule does not apply to small distributions If a minor derives beneficiary income of $1,000 or less in an income year, the minor beneficiary rule does not apply (s HC 35(4)(a)). Where the rule does not apply the beneficiary income is included in the beneficiary’s income and taxed at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. If this exemption does not apply, all of the beneficiary income received by the beneficiary will be subject to the minor beneficiary rule (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 5, May 2001 at 30). The exemption for small distributions applies to each trust that a minor receives beneficiary income from in an income year (QB 07/02: “Whether the minor beneficiary rule exemption in section HH 3B (now HC 35(4)(a)) applies on a $1,000 ‘per beneficiary’ or on a $1,000 ‘per beneficiary per trust’ basis”: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 19, No 4, May 2007 at 10). However, where multiple small distributions are made to the same beneficiary from different trusts it would be prudent to consider whether the anti-avoidance provisions could apply. In calculating whether the exemption for small distributions applies, income from other sources is disregarded. Settlements from certain trusts are excluded from the minor beneficiary rule The minor beneficiary rule will not apply to beneficiary income derived by a minor if all the settlements on to the trust meet the requirements of s HC 37(1) (discussed below) or were made by a person who is neither a relative or a guardian of the minor beneficiary, or associated with a relative or guardian (s HC 36(1)(a)).  This exception reflects the policy basis of the minor beneficiary rule that the rule’s primary application is to avoid income splitting within family groups. Any settlement is defined by reference to a settlor. The definition of settlor is modified for the purposes of the minor beneficiary rules and means a person who transfers value to a trust, provides financial assistance or is treated as a settlor under s HC 28. However, if the transfer of value is the provision of a low interest loan existing on or after 1 April 2002, to comply with the definition, the interest rate must be less than the fringe benefit tax prescribed interest rate on 31 March of the previous tax year. Also excluded from the definition is any transfer of value that includes: ▪ the provision of financial assistance by way of a guarantee that was not called on or the provision of security that was not called on, and ▪ services that are incidental to the operation of the trust, such as bookkeeping or accounting services or those provided in being a trustee. For the purposes of the minor beneficiary rule, if a settlement is made on a trust and further settlements are made on the same terms, all the settlements may be treated as one trust. See ¶25-010. The term “relative” is generally defined for the purposes of the minor beneficiary rule as a person connected within the second degree of relationship, marriage (including de facto relationships and civil unions) or adoption, and includes the trustee of a trust under which that person has benefited or is eligible to benefit. For the purposes of the minor beneficiary rule the term “guardian” broadly adopts the definition of “guardianship” as set out in s 15 of the Care of Children Act 2004 but excludes a guardian appointed under: ▪ s 110(1)(a)–(d) of the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989  ▪ s 31 of the Care of Children Act ▪ s 53 of the Public Trust Office Act 1957, by a court order (note the Public Trust Office Act was repealed by the Public Trust Act 2001. The equivalent provision in the Public Trust Act is s 75), or ▪ s 7(4) of the Adoption Act 1955. Settlements from unrelated parties are not subject to the minor beneficiary rule The minor beneficiary rule does not apply if all settlements on to the trust were made by a settlor who is a relative, guardian or a person associated with a relative or guardian; and that settlor is acting as the minor beneficiary’s agent and has received the property from an unrelated person (s HC 36(1)(b)(i)). The associated person test for the purposes of the minor beneficiary rule is contained in subpart YB, but does not include a person associated only because a relative is treated as an associated person pursuant to ss YB 4 and YB 5 (s HC 36(5) “associated person or person associated”). Settlements made pursuant to a court order may not be subject to the minor beneficiary rule The minor beneficiary rule does not apply if all settlements on to the trust are made in accordance with a court order that requires a settlor (who is a relative, guardian or a person associated with a relative or guardian) to pay damages or compensation to the minor (s HC 36(1)(b)(ii)). There is little commentary on the exemption for such settlements and as to what kinds of court-ordered damages or compensation it is intended should qualify for the exemption. However, it is clear that the exception does not apply to court orders made in accordance with the Property (Relationships) Act 1976, which provide for the settlement of property upon a trust whether on the breakdown of a family or otherwise. See the report to the Finance and Expenditure Committee on the Taxation (Beneficiary Income of Minors, Services-  related Payments and Remedial Matters) Bill prepared by the Policy Advice Division of Inland Revenue and Treasury (19 February 2001 at 25). Settlements made in relation to a protection order are not subject to the minor beneficiary rule The minor beneficiary rule does not apply if all settlements on to the trust were made by a settlor (who is a relative, guardian or a person associated with a relative or guardian) if the minor is a protected person (as defined in the Domestic Violence Act 1995, s 2) in relation to a protection order and if the settlement occurs before the protection order is made or when the order is in force. Settlements on to qualifying testamentary trusts are not subject to the minor beneficiary rule The minor beneficiary rule does not apply to beneficiary income derived by a minor if all the settlements on to the trust meet the requirements of s HC 36 (1) (discussed above) or were made pursuant to a will, codicil, intestacy or court variation, and: ▪ the minor is alive within 12 months of the settlor’s death, or ▪ the minor has a sibling or half-sibling alive within 12 months of the date of the settlor’s death (s HC 37(1)). This exception will not apply if a will is varied by a deed of family arrangement, otherwise than as a result of a court order. Other beneficiary income not subject to the rule Beneficiary income derived: ▪ by a minor in receipt of a child disability allowance ▪ directly by a minor from a group investment fund, or ▪ by a minor from a Māori authority is not subject to the rule. Exemption for small additional settlements  The minor beneficiary rule does not apply if the only settlements that do not come under an exclusion to the rule are settlements comprising: ▪ dispositions of property that do not exceed $5,000 in total value at the end of the trust’s income year (each settlement being valued at the date of settlement (s HC 36(3)(a)), or ▪ the provision of financial assistance for less than market value that has a total value not exceeding $1,000 on any day in the trust’s income year (s HC 36(3)(b)). Before 23 March 2020, financial assistance was defined broadly in s HC 36(5) and included the provision of a loan, guarantee, security, or other assistance for less than market value. From 23 March 2020, “financial assistance” is defined in s YA 1, for the purposes of subpart HC, for a person or trust, as meaning assistance provided to or for the benefit of the person or trust that produces a financial benefit for which the person or trust provides less than market value. For the avoidance of doubt, an amount payable on demand for the assistance where demand is not exercised or is deferred is treated as assistance having been provided for less than market value. Trusts that have received such settlements are sometime referred to mixed trusts for the purposes of the minor beneficiary rule. Care must be taken before making any further settlement on to a mixed trust to ensure that the thresholds are not exceeded. As a matter of pragmatism, rather than relying on the small additional settlements exclusion, a trustee of a trust that is otherwise untainted may wish to consider refusing settlements that will taint a trust, where possible directing these settlements to separate trusts. The exception for small additional settlements does not apply if services are supplied to a trust by a relative, guardian or associated person. However, for this purpose the term “services” does not include services incidental to the operation of the trust such as bookkeeping or accounting services, or services as a trustee. This rule is intended to ensure that income distributed to minor  beneficiaries from trading trusts is not exempted from the minor beneficiary rule. If no exception applies, all beneficiary income derived by a minor beneficiary from the trust will be subject to the minor beneficiary rule. Such trusts are often referred to as tainted trusts, the terminology reflecting the fact that any distribution to a minor from such a trust will be “tainted” and the minor beneficiary rule will apply. Tracing is not available Where a trust contains settlements from tainted and untainted settlements, it is not possible to trace distributions so that the rule can be avoided by limiting a distribution to untainted settlements. Where an earlier settlement has “tainted a trust,” the only way to avoid this effect would be for a subsequent “untainted settlement” to be on to a new or different trust that was subject to an exclusion from the minor beneficiary rule. The veracity of doing so will likely depend in the most part on the value of such an untainted settlement and the cost of the application of the rule, presuming it is still desirable or necessary to make distributions of beneficiary income to a minor, who would otherwise be subject to the rule. Losses incurred by the minor cannot be offset against minor beneficiary income Income subject to the minor beneficiary rule is the minor’s excluded income for tax purposes. This means that losses incurred by a minor cannot be offset against any minor beneficiary income. Law: IT07 ss CX 58, HC 3, HC 7(2), HC 17(2), HC 27(2), HC 35–HC 37, YA 1  ¶25-055 Trustee income and imputation Dividend income forms part of trustee income (unless distributed as beneficiary income) and is taxed accordingly. See ¶25-035. When a dividend received by a trustee as trustee income has an imputation credit attached, the trustee is subject to tax on that dividend including the amount of the tax credit (in the same way as  an individual shareholder: see ¶16-550). Any such tax credit may be set off against the trustee’s current year liability. A trustee is not entitled to a refund for imputation credits that cannot be used. Instead, the credits are deemed to be a tax loss for the income year that can be carried forward to succeeding income years. The amount of tax loss to be carried forward is the amount of the unused credit, divided by the basic rate of income tax for trustees (ie 33%). Unused credits converted to tax losses and not used are lost when a trust is ultimately wound up. Regarding the use of tax credits to satisfy income tax liability generally, see ¶2-110. Law: IT07 s LE 2  BENEFICIARY INCOME ¶25-065 Beneficiary income Trust income is beneficiary income or trustee income Income earned by a trustee is either trustee income or beneficiary income. Income, distributed to a beneficiary is, with few exceptions, taxed to the beneficiary at the beneficiary’s marginal rate. Although the dichotomy between trustee and beneficiary income is simple in principle, differentiating between trustee and beneficiary income can be less straightforward in practice. Definition “Beneficiary income” means income derived by the trustee in an income year to the extent to which: ▪ it vests absolutely in interest in a beneficiary in the income year, or ▪ is paid to a beneficiary in the income year, or by the later of: □ a date within six months of the end of the income year, or  □ the earlier of: a. the date on which the trustee files the tax return, or b. the date by which the trustee must file a tax return under s 37 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. If a deed of trust includes a clause that provides that any income not allocated or paid within six months will be capitalised, care is required to ensure that the relevant terms of the deed of trust permit (or can be varied to permit) income to be paid outside the six-month period. The definition of beneficiary income includes an RWT substitution payment, but does not include: ▪ income derived by a trustee in any income year during which the trust is a superannuation fund ▪ an amount by which a tax credit of a beneficiary for RWT is reduced by an amount of an RWT substitution payment under s LB 3(6) ▪ an amount of a detached tax credit of a beneficiary allocated under s LB 3(5), and ▪ income derived by a trustee to which ss CC 3(2) (financial arrangements) and EW 50 (income when debt forgiven to trustee) apply. See ¶6-358. Vests absolutely in interest For the purposes of the definition of “beneficiary income”, income “vests absolutely in interest” in a beneficiary where the beneficiary obtains an immediate fixed right of present or future possession of the income. For example, income derived by a trustee will ordinarily immediately vest absolutely in interest in a beneficiary with a life interest in the income of the trust. Income will also vest in a beneficiary through an appropriate resolution, following which the income is the beneficiary’s income. See ss CV 13(a) and HC 17. A  trustee cannot cancel a resolution without committing fraud against the beneficiary (Re Vesty’s Settlement [1951] Ch 209 and C of IR v Ward 69 ATC 6050; [1970] NZLR 1). From a trust law perspective the payment or application must constitute a valid exercise of a power available to the trustees under the trust instrument. However, a trustee has no obligation to advise a beneficiary that income has vested in that beneficiary. Paid Income will be “paid” to a beneficiary if the income is transferred to the beneficiary in money or money’s worth. It is not necessary that the income be transferred directly to the beneficiary; it is sufficient that the income is placed unreservedly at the disposal of the beneficiary. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 1, No 5, November 1989, Appendix, para 5.24. (The definition of “pay” in s YA 1 includes to distribute, to credit, or to deal with in the interest or on the behalf of.) Income will be paid to, or will vest in, a beneficiary, if, among other things, the trustees pass a resolution that results in the income becoming the absolute property of the beneficiary. Deemed income can give rise to beneficiary income Deemed income, for example foreign investment fund income, may not result in actual cash flow to a trust in the year it is derived, or at all. This mismatch between trust law income and tax law income raises the question as to whether deemed income can give rise to beneficiary income. The Commissioner’s position outlined in interpretation statement IS 12/02, “Income tax — whether income deemed to arise under tax law, but not trust law, can give rise to beneficiary income” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 7, August 2012 at 49), is that the correct treatment of deemed income depends on the terms of the deed of trust. If the trust deed does not define income, that is tax law and trust law income for a trust are different, the deemed income will be treated and taxed as trustee income.  However, if the trust deed defines trust law income as income calculated for tax purposes; or the trust deed defines income using trust law concepts of capital and income but the trustees have a power to distribute capital to income beneficiaries, then deemed income can give rise to beneficiary income. Accordingly, it is necessary to review the deed of trust before trustees resolve to distribute deemed income as beneficiary income. Payment by resolution If the trustees resolve to allocate income of the trust to more than one beneficiary, the resolution must irrevocably provide for a fixed amount or share of that income to be allocated to each of those beneficiaries. Although the entitlement of each beneficiary must be certain, the resolution need not define a specific sum: Davidson v C of IR (1976) 2 NZTC 61,121. Identification of income It is arguable that an amount that is income for tax purposes but that would otherwise have been accounted for as capital by a trustee does not technically meet the definition of either trustee or beneficiary income. An example of such is income that arises as a result of the application of the financial arrangements rules. This “income” is derived only for tax purposes and would otherwise be recorded as a capital gain to the trustees. The practical difficulty for trustees where the income is not actually received in any conventional sense is to determine firstly whether there is any compliance with the definition of beneficiary income and secondly how to meet the trust’s tax obligations and ensure compliance with the terms of the deed of trust. The issue may seem esoteric and largely irrelevant. However, on closer consideration it is clear that some trustees will struggle to reconcile tax and trust obligations in respect of certain income. Although it may not be possible to pay income that has not yet been received, such income can vest absolutely in interest in a beneficiary under the terms of the trust instrument or be effectively paid to a beneficiary in accordance with an appropriately worded resolution.  While this may be of no moment if all beneficiaries are beneficiaries as to capital and income, the distinction is far more important when say there is a class of beneficiary that is only entitled to income and a class of beneficiary only entitled to capital. The difficulty arises because the income resulting from the financial arrangements rules, although income for tax purposes, will require a distribution of trust capital to effect the distribution of income. Unless a deed of trust provides that the trustee has the power to determine whether any sum is capital or income, the ability for the trustee to distribute such income will depend on a careful consideration of the terms of the deed of trust. Impact of COVID-19 virus on determination of beneficiary or trustee income As stated above, beneficiary income is an amount derived by a trustee in an income year that either vests absolutely in the beneficiary in the income year or is paid to the beneficiary in the income year or by one of the following dates after the end of the income year: ▪ the later of 6 months after the end of the income year, or ▪ the earlier of when the trustee files the return of income for the income year and the date by which the trustee must file a return of income. Therefore, in respect of the 2019 income year, beneficiary income would have included amounts paid up to 31 March 2020 if the trust had a tax agent (and therefore an extension of time to file the return). The Commissioner stated that she accepted that a trustee might have missed the 31 March cut-off to make payment to a beneficiary due to either the imposition of COVID-19 response measures or as a consequence of COVID-19. It was considered that in the context of COVID-19, this would be an unintended consequence of a strict application of s HC 6. To mitigate such unintended consequences, the Commissioner exercised her power under s 6A of the Tax Administration Act 1994  as follows: ▪ Where a trustee of a trust was unable, for the 2019 income year and as a result of either the effects of COVID-19 or those restrictions, to meet the requirements of s HC 6(1B)(b)(ii) to make payment to a beneficiary, the Commissioner treated any such payment that was made on or before 15 July 2020 as having met those requirements. ▪ Where any such payment was made to a beneficiary, the trustee had to advise the beneficiary to take such steps as were necessary to ensure that any income tax assessment already made for the 2019 tax year was amended to include the beneficiary income. See Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 — Your questions answered”, 2 July 2020. Law: IT07 ss HC 5, HC 6  ¶25-075 Residence of beneficiaries A resident beneficiary is taxed on all beneficiary income and taxable distributions whether comprised of amounts derived from New Zealand or from offshore. However, in the event that a person ceases to be a New Zealand resident and within a period of five years renews that person’s New Zealand residence, any beneficiary income derived from a foreign or non-complying trust or any taxable distribution derived during the beneficiary’s absence (commencing with the day on which the person ceases to be resident in New Zealand and ending when that person again becomes resident in New Zealand) is taxed in the year the beneficiary again becomes resident. These rules are designed to prevent a beneficiary changing residence to defeat the trust rules. Law: IT07 ss CV 15, HC 23  ¶25-085 Non-resident beneficiaries  A non-resident beneficiary is only taxed on beneficiary income and taxable distributions comprising amounts derived from New Zealand. This means that a non-resident beneficiary in receipt of a foreignsourced amount passing through a complying, foreign or noncomplying trust is not liable for New Zealand tax. Such a beneficiary is only liable to New Zealand tax in relation to income deemed to be derived in New Zealand. Non-resident beneficiaries are able to benefit from the foreign investor tax credit regime if they derive dividends and supplementary dividends as beneficiary income from New Zealand resident companies in terms of s LP 2. See ¶26-500. Section LP 6 clarifies that the payment of a supplementary dividend to a non-resident beneficiary of a fixed trust will not contravene any terms of the trust. Section LE 5 contains anti-streaming rules that take into account the effect of any supplementary dividend received by a non-resident beneficiary. See ¶25-105. Law: IT07 ss LE 5, LP 6  ¶25-095 Beneficiaries and foreign tax credits A beneficiary is allowed a foreign tax credit for foreign tax paid on beneficiary income derived from an overseas jurisdiction. However, a beneficiary in receipt of a taxable distribution from a foreign or noncomplying trust is entitled only to a foreign tax credit for tax paid that is the equivalent of non-resident withholding tax. Law: IT07 s LJ 6  ¶25-105 Beneficiary income and imputation Special rules govern the allocation of imputation credits to beneficiaries to prevent trustees from streaming credits to beneficiaries who may be better able to use them in preference to those beneficiaries who may not be in a position to use them — eg beneficiaries who are non-resident or tax exempt.  Imputation credits attached to dividends distributed as beneficiary income are allocated to beneficiaries based on the following formula: (person’s distributions ÷ trust distributions) × (total beneficiary credits − person’s supplementary dividend) where: person’s distributions is total distributions for the tax year made to the beneficiary. trust distributions is total of all distributions made to all the beneficiaries for the tax year. total beneficiary credits is the total imputation attached to the dividends paid to all beneficiaries, including credits attached to supplementary dividends paid to the beneficiaries. person’s supplementary dividend is the total supplementary dividends paid to the beneficiary for the tax year. This rule applies even if, for example, one beneficiary receives all dividend income and another receives non-dividend or capital payments only. Beneficiaries are entitled to set off the allocated credits against their income tax liability for the year. Any excess credits will either be converted to a net loss to carry forward, or will be carried forward as a credit of tax to the next income year. See further at ¶17-010. A minor beneficiary’s share of imputation credits attached to dividend income distributed to that beneficiary is available to the trustee as a credit against any tax payable by the trustee on minor beneficiary income. Dividends from qualifying company Provision is made by s HA 14 for dividends paid by a qualifying company to be exempt income in the hands of the recipient. The exemption will remain if the dividend received by a trustee shareholder is then applied as beneficiary income. In other words, a New Zealand resident beneficiary receives such dividends as  exempt income as if the beneficiary was the shareholder. See s CW 15. Look-through companies A company that has elected into the look-through company (LTC) regime is excluded from the definition of company for the purposes of the Income Tax Act 2007. This means that LTCs do not keep memorandum accounts and the rules that apply to the payment of dividends do not apply to LTCs. See ¶19-200. Law: IT07 ss CW 15, HA 16, LE 2, LE 4, LE 5  ¶25-115 Distributions to beneficiaries — overview Types of distribution Generally, two types of distributions from trusts to beneficiaries are taxable: distributions of “beneficiary income” and “taxable distributions”. For a more detailed explanation of these types of distribution, see ¶25-065 and ¶25-305, respectively. Another type of distribution made from a community trust is included in the income of beneficiaries. For the tax treatment of distributions from community trusts, see ¶24-133. Beneficiaries of all three categories of trust (complying trusts, foreign trusts and non-complying trusts) are subject to tax on beneficiary income. Beneficiaries of foreign trusts and non-complying trusts are also taxed on taxable distributions. See ¶25-305. Non-resident beneficiaries are subject only to tax on distributions comprising of amounts derived from New Zealand. See ¶25-085. Rates of tax Distributions of beneficiary income are included in the income of the beneficiary and taxed at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. Taxable distributions from foreign trusts are also included in the income of the beneficiary and taxed at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. Taxable distributions from non-complying trusts are not  included in the income of beneficiaries but are taxed at the penal rate of 45%. See ¶25-425. Beneficiary income retains same character as when derived by trustee Income derived by a trustee retains its character whether the income is taxed as trustee income or beneficiary income: Baker v ArcherShee [1927] AC 844 and Syme v Webb [1914] AC 1013, eg foreign sourced income derived by trustees retains its character as foreignsourced income when distributed as beneficiary income, dividends derived by trustees retain their character as dividends when distributed as beneficiary income, etc. The Commissioner is of the view that this principle does not apply in the case of taxable distributions. In the Commissioner’s view, such distributions constitute a separate category of income in a beneficiary’s hands. Accordingly, taxable distributions are not characterised according to the character in the trustee’s hands of the amounts from which the distributions are made. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 1, No 5, November 1989, Appendix, paras 8.7 and 8.8. Beneficiaries do not receive deductions A person with beneficiary income does not receive a deduction for any expenditure or loss that the trustee has incurred in deriving that income. See s DV 9(1). However, a trustee can treat beneficiary income as trustee income for the purposes of determining the trustee’s deductions for a tax year. The deduction is therefore available to the trustee. Trustee liable for tax as agent of beneficiary Generally, a trustee of a trust is liable to pay the tax on beneficiary income and taxable distributions as agent of the beneficiary. The beneficiary must return beneficiary income and taxable distributions in his or her own tax return, but can claim a credit for the tax paid on his or her behalf by the trustee. Should the trustee fail to meet a beneficiary’s tax obligations and the beneficiary is a New Zealand resident, the liability for tax falls on the beneficiary. When the beneficiary is a non-resident, the trustee is liable as an agent for any  of the income the beneficiary derives from New Zealand. However, a trustee is not liable as agent of the beneficiary in respect of distributions from community trusts. Beneficiaries of community trusts are accountable for their own tax on distributions from community trusts. See s HC 32 and ¶24-133. Distributions and resulting acquisitions treated as occurring at market value When the trustees of a trust distribute property to a beneficiary or when property is resettled onto another trust the transfer is valued at market value for both the transferor and the transferee. The effective date of the transfer is the date on which the transaction occurs. See subpart FC. See further at ¶25-545 and ¶25-645. Law: IT07 ss CV 13, DV 9, HC 17–HC 20, HC 32, HD 12(1)  ¶25-125 Beneficiaries occupying family home owned by trust It is common in New Zealand for family homes to be transferred to a trust by individuals who may be settlors, trustees and beneficiaries of the trust. These individuals may also occupy the family home. This occupation can be by way of a licence granted before the transfer or more often pursuant to a trustee resolution. When trustees resolve to make trust property such as the family home available rent free to beneficiaries in their capacity as beneficiaries, this is generally a distribution of capital that does not give rise to any income tax consequences. (However, note that if the trust is a foreign or non-complying trust, the distribution could be taxable to beneficiaries — see ¶25-305.) If the beneficiaries pay rates, insurance and other expenses relating to the property from private funds, arguably these are expenses incidental to the occupation of the property and no tax consequences arise. Alternatively, the cost of these expenses can be treated as an advance to the trustees.  Regardless of how the expenses are treated it is important that the terms on which the trust property are occupied is correctly documented, eg in a trustee resolution. If beneficiaries are meeting the expenses incidental to occupation it is important to clarify whether the beneficiaries are also meeting any interest on money borrowed by the trust to acquire the home, and if so, whether this is in fact an expense incidental to the occupation of the home. The prudent approach would be to clarify the nature of the payment, ie a gift or an advance to the trustees. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011 at 18–19. In the absence of any documentation, Inland Revenue may treat the payment of any outgoings by beneficiaries as an advance or as rental income. If payment of expenses is treated as rental income, a tax return will have to be filed by the trust. As the outgoings are deductible expenditure to the trust, the net income would likely be nil. If payment of the expenses is treated as an advance, that advance will remain an asset in the hands of the person who made the advance, unless or until the amount of the advance is gifted to the trustees. If the payment of expenses is intended to be a gift, the making and acceptance of the gift should be recorded in a deed of gift. Note in this regard that Inland Revenue has released a series of items on the tax treatment of short-stay accommodation. In December 2019, as part of this series, QB 19/15, “If property held in a trust is rented out by a beneficiary of the trust for short-stay accommodation, who should declare the income, and what deductions can be claimed?” and QB 19/16, “If property held in a trust is rented out by the trustees for short-stay accommodation, who should declare the income, and what deductions can be claimed?” were released. These items acknowledge that often a beneficiary who lives in a property will pay the property-related outgoings incurred by the trustees (such as rates and possibly property insurance) as part of the arrangement that allows them to live in the property. The items conclude that payment of those amounts by the beneficiary would be  rental income to the trustees under s CC 1. However, this rental income would generally be offset by the trustees being able to deduct the expenditure, as it is incurred by them in deriving the rental income. Non-active trusts may not need to file a tax return, but other trusts will have to file a tax return showing the income and deductions. QB 19/15 and QB 19/16 are discussed in more detail at ¶5-232 and ¶10-113.  SETTLORS ¶25-175 Settlors — significance for tax purposes The taxation of trusts for New Zealand purposes is largely based on the tax residence of the settlor. See ¶25-010. In addition, a settlor of a trust can be liable for tax on trustee income as agent of the trustee. See ¶25-025. In certain circumstances, settlors are required to disclose to the Commissioner the existence of a trust and details of its trustee and beneficiary. See ¶25-485. Whether a person is a settlor may also have implications for the calculation of income for social assistance purposes (see ¶12-125) and for calculating “adjusted net income” for student loan purposes (see ¶8-040). The term “settlor” is widely defined for the purpose of the trust regime and for those purposes is a person who directly or indirectly, in one or more transactions: ▪ transfers value to, for the benefit of, or on the terms of the trust ▪ provides services to the trust or for the benefit of the trust for less than market value unless, with effect from 18 March 2019, the services are incidental to the operation of the trust, or ▪ provides financial assistance with an obligation to pay on demand where the demand is not exercised or is deferred.  When an amount of income is allocated by a trust to a beneficiary but retained in the trust and no interest is paid by the trust to the beneficiary, the beneficiary may inadvertently become a settlor because they have transferred value to the trust. Some uncertainty surrounded this issue, as Inland Revenue (IR) had expressed differing views on the issue. In 2013, IR had indicated that merely leaving funds available at call in a trust current account would not result in a beneficiary becoming a settlor, but much more recently IR had changed its view. With effect from 1 April 2020, legislative amendments have ensured that such beneficiaries do not become settlors in certain circumstances. The amendment provides that when a trustee owes an amount to a beneficiary of the trust (such as their current account balance), the beneficiary does not become a settlor solely as a result of the money owed if: ▪ the trustee pays interest at a rate equal to the prescribed rate (as for FBT) or the market rate by the later of— □ a date that falls within six months of the end of the income year, and □ the earlier of the date on which the trustee files the return and the date the return is due, or ▪ the amount owing at the end of the income year is not more than $25,000 after adjustments to include the effect of transactions that are made after the end of the income year and by the date specified above and are included in the financial statements of the trust for the income year. As the amendment did not have retrospective effect, in August 2019 the Commissioner released an operational position to provide greater certainty and to minimise compliance costs for the period up to 31 March 2020 (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 8, September 2019 at 113). The operational position stated that until 31 March 2020 Inland Revenue would continue to allow taxpayers to rely on the previous public position that merely leaving funds available at call in a trust current account would not result in a beneficiary becoming a settlor.  ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to clarify that a beneficiary that is owed money by a trust will always become a settlor unless they meet the above requirements. Thus, a beneficiary who is owed more than $25,000 on which interest has not been paid at the prescribed or market rate will become a settlor of the trust. The proposed amendment is intended to apply from 1 April 2020. With effect from 23 March 2020, s HC 31B provides a formula for calculating the value of a transfer (for settlement or distribution purposes) arising from the provision of financial assistance by one person (the creditor) for the benefit of another person (the debtor), where ▪ the debtor does not pay interest on the debt amount at a rate equal to the prescribed rate or the market rate ▪ the debt is not forgiven, and ▪ the right of the creditor to demand the debt amount is not exercised or is deferred. The formula is based on the nominal value of the financial assistance given (the debt amount) and the benchmark rate, being the amount of interest that would have accrued at either the prescribed rate or market rate of interest, at the debtor’s choice. The value of the distribution or settlement for any period (for example, an income year) is the amount by which the benchmark interest exceeds the actual amount of interest paid for the financial assistance. The definition of settlor also includes any person who: ▪ acts or refrains from acting or enters into a transaction or a series of transactions in relation to a trust with the effect of defeating the intent and application of the trust rules ▪ in relation to a controlled foreign company (CFC) that settles an amount onto a trust, holds a control interest of 10% or more in  the CFC, from 23 March 2020, either: □ at the time of the settlement, or □ for the accounting period of the CFC in which the settlement occurs ▪ in relation to a company that settles an amount onto a trust and would have been a CFC at the time of the settlement if it had been a foreign company, would be treated as having a control interest of 10% or more in the company, if the company were a foreign company— □ at the time of the settlement, or □ for the accounting period of the company in which the settlement occurs, or ▪ acquires any right under an existing trust with the purpose or effect of being able to require the trustee to treat that person, or a nominee, as a beneficiary. Any person who is a settlor of one trust, the trustee of which settles another trust, will be a settlor of that other trust. Although note that special rules apply in relation to the resettlement of property of a foreign trust. Note that the definition of “settlor” is amended for the minor beneficiary rule. See ¶25-045. The importance of correctly identifying settlors has implications that extend beyond trust classification. See ¶7-020 regarding the brightline test exceptions. Settlement For the purposes of the trust regime, the term settlement is defined as any action or failure to act on the part of any person, or any transaction, or series of transactions, entered into by a person that has the effect of making that person a settlor. When a person is or is  treated as a settlor in respect of any settlement, that person is treated as having made the settlement. Migration of settlors The policy behind the taxation of trusts in New Zealand is that the residence of a trustee does not determine tax liability. Instead the liability for taxation turns in most part on the residence of the settlor (as the trust’s economic agent) or the beneficiary in receipt of beneficiary income. For this reason it is extremely important to ensure that the significance of any settlor migrating from New Zealand is noted. However, the legislation does not differentiate between single and joint settlors. This means that where there is more than one settlor the consequences of the settlors’ migration only applies when all the settlors have migrated. Where there is no longer a resident settlor a trust can become a non-complying trust. See ¶25-285 and ¶25-385. If a settlor of a complying trust migrates from New Zealand, the trust will continue to be treated as a complying trust if: ▪ the trustee continues to pay New Zealand tax at the trustee rate on the world-wide trustee income of the trust, and ▪ the trustee indicates in the annual return the intention for the trust to be a complying trust. Although the residence of trustees does not determine tax liability in New Zealand it is important to appreciate that it is more common for trusts to be taxed by reference to the residence of trustees. Accordingly, the emigration of a single trustee can have tax consequences for a trust if the trustee moves to a jurisdiction where a trust is taxed based on the trustee’s residence. This can be the case regardless of the fact that the trust’s settlor remains in the jurisdiction where the trust was settled; or if other trustees do not migrate. The different tests of residence are of particular relevance to New Zealand residents due to the relative ease with which New  Zealanders migrate to Australia, which like most international jurisdictions taxes trusts in terms of residence or control. For Australian tax purposes a trust can be regarded as resident in Australia for tax purposes if a single trustee is resident at any time during an income year or if the central management and control of the trust was in Australia at any time during an income year (s 95(2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936). Law: IT07 ss HC 27, HC 28, HC 31B, HC 33, YA 1  ¶25-185 Settlors — tax liability A settlor of a trust who is resident in New Zealand for any part of a tax year may be taxed as agent of the trustee on trustee income which the trustee derives in that tax year. This rule applies where a settlement was made to, or for the benefit of, the trust on or after 17 December 1987. If there is more than one settlor, the settlors are jointly and severally liable. This provision does not apply where: ▪ a trustee of the trust is resident in New Zealand either for the whole of the income year or for that part of the year commencing with the date on which a settlement was first made on the trust, as the case may be ▪ the trust is a charitable trust ▪ the settlor is a settlor of a superannuation fund ▪ the trustee income is derived as a result of the application of s EW 31 or EZ 38 (financial arrangement rules base price adjustment) to amounts remitted by the settlor under a financial arrangement ▪ the settlor (being a natural person) was not resident in New Zealand at the time of making a settlement on the trust, and had not been resident at the time of any previous settlement that  occurred after 17 December 1987, unless that settlor elects to be taxed under s HC 33, or ▪ the settlor is able to satisfy the Commissioner that that settlor’s tax liability on trustee income is excessive in comparison to the liability of other settlors of the same trust, taking into account the respective settlements made. Law: IT07 ss HC 29, HD 12(2)  TRUST CLASSIFICATION ¶25-225 Trust classification Trusts are classified into three categories for tax purposes. These are complying trusts (formerly known as qualifying trusts) (see ¶25245), foreign trusts (see ¶25-265) and non-complying trusts (formerly known as non-qualifying trusts) (see ¶25-285). The significance of the distinction between the categories of trust lies in the tax treatment of distributions made from them. Distributions of “beneficiary income” are taxed at the beneficiaries’ marginal rates regardless of the category of trust from which they are made. However, for distributions other than beneficiary income, the tax treatment depends on the category of trust from which the distribution is made. The position may be summarised as follows: ▪ Complying trusts — all distributions other than beneficiary income are received by beneficiaries tax-free ▪ Foreign trusts — all distributions other than beneficiary income and certain arm’s length capital gains and the corpus of the trust are taxed at the beneficiaries’ marginal rates of tax, and ▪ Non-complying trusts — all distributions other than beneficiary income and the corpus of the trust are taxed to beneficiaries at the penal rate of 45%.  For more on the tax treatment of distributions from trusts, see ¶25065, ¶25-305 and ¶25-425. Dual status trusts — foreign trusts that are also complying trusts An issue does arise in relation to the potential dual status of a trust. A trust that has no New Zealand resident settlors will be a foreign trust (see ¶25-265). However, such a trust may also be a complying trust if the trustees have paid tax on all their worldwide trustee income at the trustee rate of 33% (see ¶25-245). For example, a trust established in New Zealand by non-resident settlors with New Zealand resident trustees to hold New Zealand assets, such as a farm or other real estate, will be a complying trust if it has filed tax returns in New Zealand and paid tax on its worldwide income and otherwise complied with all its tax obligations. The tax treatment of a trust is determined by its classification as a complying, foreign or non-complying trust and, as such, it was never intended that a trust should have a dual status. In the 1989 Tax Information Bulletin published after enactment of the current trust tax regime, the Inland Revenue (IR) stated that if a foreign trust also satisfied the definition of a complying trust (then a qualifying trust), it would be treated as a complying trust. However, following the 2017 changes to the foreign trust disclosure regime, all foreign trusts must register as a foreign trust under the disclosure regime. The current legislation does not exclude a foreign trust from being a foreign trust if it is also a complying trust. Therefore, a trust that is both a foreign trust and a complying trust needs to meet the registration and disclosure requirements that apply to foreign trusts. IR also takes the view that all dual status trusts must register under the foreign trust disclosure regime. Law: IT07 s HC 9  ¶25-245 Complying trusts Most trusts settled by a New Zealand resident settlor fall within the definition of complying trust in s HC 10.  Complying trust defined A complying trust is a trust for which, for the life of the trust, the trustees: ▪ are liable for tax at the trustee rate on all their worldwide trustee income, and ▪ have always met their income tax compliance obligations. The “life of the trust” includes every income year from the start of the income year in which a settlement was first made on the trust up to the time of a distribution. For all of the trust’s income to be taxable in full, the trustee’s income cannot include any income that is non-resident passive income, nonresidents’ foreign-sourced income, or foreign-sourced amounts. Complying trust income is taxed as: ▪ trustee income, or ▪ beneficiary income at the beneficiary’s marginal rate. Distributions of accumulated income, capital gains and corpus from a complying trust are exempt income to the recipient beneficiary and are tax-free: s HC 20. Election to be a complying trust With effect from 23 March 2020, the point in time from which a trust will be a complying trust if an election has been made to pay New Zealand tax on worldwide trustee income has been clarified. The main clarification is that a trust will be a complying trust for a distribution of trustee income earned after the application date of the election. An election may be made for a trust to alter its state from a foreign or a non-complying trust to become a complying trust (see ¶25-345 and ¶25-365). It is confirmed that a complying trust is either: ▪ a trust that has always had a New Zealand resident settlor and has always satisfied its New Zealand tax obligations on its taxable income, or  ▪ a trust that has elected (or is deemed to have elected) to pay New Zealand tax at the trustee rate on worldwide trustee income and, for all income years beginning on or after the date on which the election applies, has always satisfied its New Zealand tax obligations for its taxable income. No trustee income includes exempt foreign-sourced income A trust will not be a complying trust in a tax year in which it makes a distribution if, in any tax year since the trust was first settled, a New Zealand resident trustee of a trust that does not have a settlor who is a New Zealand resident (who is not a transitional resident) has derived any exempt foreign-sourced amount. In broad terms, a “foreign-sourced amount” is an amount that is not derived from New Zealand. A foreign-sourced amount will be exempt income to a trustee to the extent that s HC 26 applies (see s CW 54). For more on when foreign-sourced amounts are excluded from a trustee’s income, see ¶25-035. For more on transitional residents, see ¶5-700. All of trustee’s New Zealand income tax obligations must be satisfied To be a complying trust in relation to a distribution, in all tax years since the trust was first settled, all of the trustee’s New Zealand tax obligations must have been satisfied. Satisfaction of trustee’s income tax obligations For the purposes of the definition of “complying trust”, a trust that is a non-complying trust only because income tax has been underpaid or some other tax obligation has not been met can retrospectively become a complying trust if the tax obligation is satisfied. Taxable distributions made during the period when there was an underpayment or some other tax obligation not met are effectively unwound. All income paid out as beneficiary income In some circumstances, a trustee may derive income but pay it all out as beneficiary income, and therefore not be liable for income tax  in respect of that income. This would not, in the Commissioner’s view, take a trust outside the definition of a complying trust. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 9, February 1995 at 2. Exemption for foreign-sourced amounts There is a limited exemption that relieves a non-resident trustee from the obligation to pay tax on income derived from outside New Zealand and that would otherwise be included in the trustee’s income. See s HC 25 and ¶25-035. However, the exemption is disregarded when determining whether the trust is a complying trust; the trustee income remains liable to income tax and that liability must be satisfied. As neither the settlor nor the trustee will be liable for tax on the income, the trust will only be a complying trust in relation to distributions if an election to pay tax on trustee income is made in accordance with s HC 33 (see ¶25-365) and the tax is paid. Superannuation funds Superannuation funds are complying trusts. See para (b) of the definition of “complying trust” in s HC 10(1). Foreign trusts can become complying trusts A foreign trust can become a complying trust if a settlor becomes resident in New Zealand and an appropriate election is made for the trust to pay tax on its worldwide trustee income. See ¶25-345. A foreign trust may also have dual status as a foreign trust and a complying trust in certain circumstances. See ¶25-225. Complying trusts and unit trusts A trust that meets the definition of both a “complying trust” and a “unit trust” is treated as a unit trust for tax purposes (see ¶25-010 and ¶24-190). In public binding ruling BR Pub 95/5A, the Commissioner clarified the relationship between unit trusts and qualifying (complying) trusts. The ruling states that if an entity meets all the requirements of the definition of a unit trust, it falls outside the trust rules and is treated as a unit trust for tax purposes. Note that, although the ruling was not extended beyond its 1999–2000 income year termination date, in  April 2000 the Commissioner advised that the non-renewal of the ruling should not be taken as indication of a change to the interpretation of the legislation as set out in the ruling and that the Commissioner’s view on the issue remained the same. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 5, May 2000 at 4. Law: IT07 ss BD 1(4), CW 54, HC 10, HC 25, HC 26, YA 1  ¶25-265 Foreign trusts With effect from 21 February 2017, a trust is a “foreign trust” at a particular time if no settlor has been a resident of New Zealand in the period from the later of 17 December 1987 or the date the trust was first settled until that particular time. Note that previously the “foreign trust” definition was tied to the time a distribution was made. This meant that trusts could arguably escape the foreign trust disclosure rules (see ¶25-488) if a distribution had not been made even where there was a New Zealand resident trustee. Therefore the definition was amended. The term “settlor” is defined extremely widely and in order to preserve foreign trust status, it is crucial that no inadvertent settlements are made on the trust by a New Zealand resident. For more on the definition of the term “settlor”, see ¶25-175. If a settlor of a foreign trust becomes resident in New Zealand, an election can be made for the trust to become a complying trust. See ¶25-345. There are specific disclosure requirements for New Zealand resident trustees of foreign trusts that are not required in respect of complying trusts. See further at ¶25-488. However, note that the disclosure requirements will apply to complying trusts that are also foreign trusts. See discussion on dual status trusts at ¶25-225. Foreign trusts are also subject to certain record keeping requirements in New Zealand. See further at ¶1-505. Law: IT07 ss HC 10(2), HC 11  ¶25-285 Non-complying trusts A “non-complying trust” is defined as any trust that, at the time a distribution is made, is neither a complying trust nor a foreign trust. In broad terms, this will be a trust where: ▪ a settlor has been resident in New Zealand after the later of either: □ 17 December 1987, or □ the date on which the trust was first settled ▪ but: □ any trustee income was only non-resident passive income (eg the trustee is non-resident and derives interest or dividend income from New Zealand), or □ foreign-sourced trustee income derived by the trustee has not been liable to New Zealand income tax (because a settlor has not been resident in New Zealand at all times since the later of those dates: see ¶25-245), or □ the trustee income has been liable to income tax but the trustee’s obligations in respect of that liability have not been satisfied. Foreign and complying trusts can become non-complying trusts A foreign trust may become a non-complying trust if no election to pay tax on trustee income is made within 12 months of a settlor of the trust becoming resident in New Zealand. See ¶25-345. A complying trust may become a non-complying trust if no settlor (who is not a transitional resident) is a New Zealand resident and the trustee derives exempt foreign-sourced income, or the trustee is non-resident and any trustee income is only non-resident passive income. See ¶25-385.  Law: IT07 s HC 12  ¶25-305 Taxable distributions In addition to tax on “beneficiary income”, beneficiaries of foreign trusts and non-complying trusts also pay tax on “taxable distributions”. The concept of a taxable distribution does not apply to a complying trust. The only distribution from a complying trust that is included within a beneficiary’s income is beneficiary income. Other distributions are received by beneficiaries of complying trusts taxfree. A “taxable distribution” is any distribution to a beneficiary from a foreign or non-complying trust, not being beneficiary income or distributions that comprise corpus of the trust. “Corpus” is an amount equal to the market value at the date of settlement of any property settled on a trust. See Case Y25 (2008) 23 NZTC 13,270, which considers the valuation of corpus. Certain amounts are excluded from the definition of corpus. In the case of a foreign trust, certain arm’s length capital gains are also excluded from the definition of “taxable distribution” and can be distributed to beneficiaries tax-free. However, the exclusion does not extend to capital gains arising from transactions between the trustee and persons associated with the trustee. For this purpose, association is determined under subpart YB. Distributions of this latter type of capital gain will be taxable. In addition, a foreign super withdrawal (¶5-317) and a pension are also excluded from being a taxable distribution of a foreign trust. The classification regime operates to ensure that trust income and certain capital gains that can be connected with New Zealand under the trust rules are taxed in New Zealand. With effect from 23 March 2020, it has been clarified that the source of a capital gain included in a taxable distribution is determined by applying the source rules in s YD 4 that apply to income. This clarifies that a non-resident beneficiary is not taxed on a capital gain included in a taxable distribution if that gain is not sourced in New  Zealand, as New Zealand taxes non-resident beneficiaries only on their income and gains sourced from New Zealand. The same treatment is also applied to capital losses. A trustee makes a distribution when the trustee transfers value to a person because the person is a beneficiary of the trust. A “transfer of value”, which has a corresponding meaning to “transfers value”, means a transfer between persons, being: ▪ the provision of money or money’s worth, whether or not convertible into money ▪ the provision of money or money’s worth, whether or not convertible into money, for more than market value, and includes: ▪ the release of an obligation to pay money, either by agreement or operation of law, and ▪ a disposition of property at less than market value. Example: Making trust property (eg the family home) available rent free to beneficiaries in their capacity as beneficiaries is a distribution. See ¶25-125.  From 23 March 2020, an amendment has clarified that where a trustee pays a beneficiary interest on an amount owed to the beneficiary, the payment is not a distribution except to the extent the interest exceeds the greater of market rate and the prescribed rate of interest. The payment date for tax on a taxable distribution from a noncomplying trust is the terminal tax date of the person liable to pay the tax. Use of tax losses  Specific provision is made to ensure that a beneficiary of a noncomplying trust can claim a tax loss to which ss IA 2–IA 10 apply to reduce the amount of taxable distributions. The amount of tax loss, which is calculated in accordance with the formula in s HC 22(2), cannot be subtracted from the net income for the corresponding tax year for the purposes of s IA 2(2). Interpretation statement In December 2019, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement, IS 19/04, “Income tax — distributions from foreign trusts” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 28), which discusses the tax treatment of amounts of money and property received by NZ residents from overseas, including by inheritance. The statement covers how to determine if the amounts actually come from a trust (especially when another country has no law of trusts, or the law is different to NZ), whether anything received is beneficiary income or a taxable distribution from a foreign trust and when and how the ordering rules in s HC 16 might mean they are treated as taxable distributions when they might not otherwise appear to be. It also considers the law of administration of deceased estates to help determine at what point a trust might arise to make distributions taxable. The statement contains the following summary: “3. New Zealand residents are generally liable to income tax on income derived from sources in New Zealand and worldwide. Their assessable income includes money or property transferred to them by someone offshore as ‘beneficiary income’ or a ‘taxable distribution from a foreign trust’. 4. Both concepts require that the money or property comes from a ‘trust’ as that term is interpreted for New Zealand tax law purposes. It follows that the person transferring must have held the money or property according to arrangements where the essential features of a trust under New Zealand law are present. The money or property must have been held by the person as trust property with an equitable obligation to deal with it for the benefit of a person or charitable object. Whether such an  obligation exists turns on there being circumstances that give rise to something that would be within the concept of a trust were the issue to be decided under New Zealand law. Wherever in the world property is situated, if the legal basis on which it is owned or controlled and the surrounding circumstances are such that there are obligations that New Zealand law would recognise as trust obligations, then there is a trust. This is the case whether the law of another country would recognise the situation as a trust or not and whether the trust law of another country is the same as trust law here or not (see [27]–[29]). 5. Where a trust exists (unless it is a “bare” trust –– see [188] to [195] below), a distribution from it will be ‘beneficiary income’ if it is current year income derived by trustees but paid to a beneficiary in the income year (or within the extended time period provided by s HC 6(1B)). 6. For an amount that is not beneficiary income to be a ‘taxable distribution from a foreign trust’, the trust must have had no New Zealand settlor and the transfer must amount to a ‘taxable distribution’. 7. A transfer to a person as beneficiary of a foreign trust is a taxable distribution (unless it is current year income) if it is not within an exception in s HC 15(4) (such as for corpus and certain capital gains). However, the ordering rules in s HC 16 (see [131]) may apply and may override what would normally be the character of components of the distribution based on the terms of the trust or the description given of the distribution by the trust. To apply the ordering rules, good financial records for the trust are required, and the onus will be on the beneficiary to obtain that information. 8. An important exception to the requirement to apply the ordering rules is for distributions from non-discretionary trusts created by will or arising after intestacy (see [133]). 9. Where the money or property transferred to a resident is an inheritance, it may be subject to tax if a foreign trust arises following administration of the deceased’s estate. This is  unlikely to be the case (although it is possible) where the deceased was in a country that does not have the concept of a trust as part of its law. Where an inheritance does not come from a trust, there can still be New Zealand tax consequences for income that may be treated as derived by the inheritor from date of death because the law in the country concerned provides for immediate succession on death. 10. For estate administration in countries with legal systems like New Zealand’s, once personal representatives have ascertained the property available for distribution (residue), they either transfer it to beneficiaries or they vest it in someone acting in the capacity of trustee. Until they have assented to such transfer or vesting, the personal representatives have the legal and beneficial interests in the property comprising the estate and any trust provided for in the terms of a will (a testamentary trust) or under the rules governing an intestacy will not arise. 11. Where executors are also sole trustees of a testamentary trust, the residue (or part of it) will vest in themselves following assent and they will hold it on trust and in their capacity as trustees. Where separate trustees are named, the equitable interest in the property vests following assent but executors must do what is necessary to transfer legal title to the trustees. 12. A bare trust may mark the interval between assent and any beneficiary under the will taking legal title. Where a trust following assent is a bare trust, there is effectively no trust for tax purposes. 13. In contrast, testamentary trusts can take the form of express trusts, life interests and minority interests (see [38]–[43]) and will not be bare trusts. 14. When a trust arises from a deceased estate offshore, as for other foreign trusts outside the context of deceased estates, amounts subsequently distributed to beneficiaries in New Zealand may be beneficiary income or taxable distributions. Such amounts derived by an individual will not have income tax deducted at source and so will not be ‘reportable income’  included as pre-populated income information for the automatically calculated assessments made and included in the individual’s tax return each year. It will need to be included separately as ‘other income’ in the individual’s tax return.” Law: IT07 ss CV 13, CW 53, CX 59, HC 4, HC 14, HC 15, HC 18– HC 20, HC 22, HC 34, IA 3(3), YA 1  ¶25-325 Ordering rules for distributions from trusts Rules, commonly referred to as the ordering rules, apply for determining the source of a trust distribution. These rules prevent the trustee of a foreign or non-complying trust making tax-free distributions ahead of, or instead of, taxable distributions. See s HC 16. Any distribution subject to the ordering rules that is made to a beneficiary of a foreign trust or a non-complying trust is deemed to consist of the following amounts in the following order: ▪ with effect from 23 March 2020, prior-year beneficiary income of the beneficiary derived by the trustee ▪ current-year income derived by the trustee ▪ to the extent the distribution exceeds current-year income, income derived in previous income years ▪ to the extent the distribution exceeds previous years’ income, current-year capital profits or gains derived by the trustees that is not income under s HC 15(5B) (being certain gains derived from an associated person) ▪ to the extent the distribution exceeds current-year capital profits or gains, capital profits and gains derived in previous income years, and ▪ to the extent the distribution exceeds previous years’ capital profits or gains, the corpus of the trust.  A distribution from a non-complying or foreign trust that comprises the disposal of property or the provision of services to a beneficiary at less than market value is a taxable distribution but is not subject to the ordering rules. With effect from 23 March 2020, the provision of financial assistance is also a taxable distribution not subject to the ordering rules. For these purposes, financial assistance means assistance that produces a financial benefit for which the recipient provides less than market value. Assistance will be treated as provided for less than market value if it is provided at below-market rates or an amount payable for the assistance is payable on demand and the right to demand is not exercised or is deferred. Where the records maintained in relation to a trust do not permit the ordering rules to be applied accurately to determine the constituent elements of a distribution, the distribution is treated as a taxable distribution. Taxable distributions from foreign trusts are taxed at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. Taxable distributions from noncomplying trusts are taxed at the penal rate of 45%. See ¶25-425. Exceptions to the ordering rules The ordering rules do not apply to the following distributions: ▪ distributions from complying trusts (this is unless there has been an election under s HZ 2 to pay tax on trustee income. Section HZ 2 elections are those made on or before 31 May 1989 by trusts first settled before 18 December 1987) ▪ distributions from trusts created by will, codicil, or on intestacy, or from trusts on which no settlement was made after 17 December 1987, where the trustee has no discretion as to the source, nature and amount of distributions to beneficiaries, and ▪ distributions from foreign trusts which become complying trusts by election under s HC 30. When determining the constituent elements of a distribution to a beneficiary (beneficiary A), distributions to any other beneficiary  (beneficiary B) are treated as not having been made if the effect is that any part of the distribution to beneficiary A is not treated as a taxable distribution or, from 23 March 2020, beneficiary income. This anti-avoidance rule will not apply if it can be shown that amounts distributed to beneficiary B arose from a genuine transaction, the transaction is not itself a settlement and, for income years commencing on or before 23 March 2020, it places the whole amount beyond the trustee’s possession and control. See s HC 16(5). Note that interpretation statement, IS 19/04, “Income tax — distributions from foreign trusts”, discusses how the ordering rules in s HC 16 can mean amounts are treated as taxable distributions when they may not otherwise appear to be. See further at ¶25-305. Law: IT07 ss HC 15(6), (7), HC 16  ¶25-345 Foreign trust can become complying trust by election A right of election exists where on a day (the transition date) a natural person settlor who is not a transitional resident becomes a New Zealand resident or a settlor ceases to be a transitional resident and continues to be a New Zealand resident, and where the trust would have been a foreign trust had a distribution been made on the day immediately preceding the day that the settlor became a resident. Any settlor, trustee or beneficiary of the trust may, by the first anniversary of the transition date (the election expiry date), elect to satisfy the income tax liability in respect of the taxable income of the trustees of the trust under s HC 33 (see ¶25-365). This enables the trust to become a complying trust. The election is made on form IR 463. With effect from 23 March 2020, amendments clarify the point in time from which a trust will be a complying trust if an election has been made to pay New Zealand tax on worldwide trustee income. The main clarification is that a trust will be a complying trust for a  distribution of trustee income earned after the application date of the election. A trust may elect to alter its state from a foreign or a noncomplying trust to become a complying trust, but only from the date from which the election applies. Distributions from trust If such an election is made, for the purposes of the definition of a “taxable distribution” (see ¶25-305) that trust is treated as: ▪ a foreign trust to the extent to which the distribution consists of an amount derived by the trustee before the date of the election and which does not give rise after the transition date to an income tax liability that is paid before the distribution is made ▪ a complying trust to the extent to which the distribution consists of an amount derived by the trustee— □ before the date of the election and gives rise on or after the transition date to an income tax liability that is paid before the distribution is made, or □ on or after the date of the election, if the requirements of s HC 10(1)(a) are met for the trustee income derived on or after the date of the election (ie no non-resident passive income, non-residents’ foreign-sourced income or exempt income under s CW 54 is derived as trustee income and the trustee’s income tax obligations are satisfied) ▪ a non-complying trust to the extent to which the distribution consists of an amount that would not be included in a distribution described in the previous bullet points. If no election is made, for the purposes of the “taxable distribution” definition the trust is treated as: ▪ a foreign trust to the extent that the distribution consists of an amount derived by the trustee before the election expiry date and does not give rise on or after the transition date to an income tax liability  ▪ a non-complying trust to the extent that the distribution consists of an amount derived by the trustee— □ before the election expiry date and gives rise on or after the transition date to an income tax liability, or □ on or after the election expiry date. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes amendments to confirm that, where a settlor of a trust has migrated to New Zealand, a trustee of the trust may distribute accumulated trustee income to a beneficiary as exempt income. The proposed amendments will apply for a trust of which a settlor has migrated to New Zealand and: ▪ has not made an election to pay tax on world-wide trustee income within the prescribed period, but ▪ has taken steps under the voluntary disclosure rules or the voluntary election rules under s HC 33 (see ¶25-365) to pay tax on world-wide trustee income for past years after the prescribed period has ended. The proposed amendments are intended to apply for: ▪ a voluntary disclosure made on, before or after 23 March 2020, and ▪ an election made under s HC 33, from 23 March 2020. Law: IT07 ss HC 10(2), HC 30  ¶25-365 Election to become complying trust Any trust can become a complying trust. Under s HC 33, either a trustee, a settlor or a beneficiary may choose to satisfy the income tax liability of the trustee of the trust (and thereby satisfy the  complying trust definition) by electing to do so. Whoever elects to satisfy the income tax liability is liable to pay the income tax payable by the trustee in that person’s capacity as trustee (as if the trust had a New Zealand resident settlor and the trustee were a New Zealand resident) and not in the capacity as trustee as agent of a beneficiary. The provision is currently unclear on exactly when an election applies, except for in two specific circumstances. The first is if the election is made under s HC 33 as a result of the application of s HC 30 (ie an election is made in relation to a foreign trust becoming a complying trust because a settlor becomes resident), in which case the election applies from the date on which it is made. The second is if the election is a notional election arising under s HC 33(1B) (see below). Whoever makes the election must notify the Commissioner of it within the time allowed for filing a return of income for the income year. Although note that if an election is made under s HC 33 because of the application of s HC 30, notification must be given to the Commissioner by the election expiry date (see ¶25-345). Notional election as complying trust Complying trust status also arises in relation to a distribution when a trustee is treated as electing to satisfy the income tax liability of the trustee under s HC 33(1B). The requirements for this treatment are: ▪ complying trust status exists for the period beginning at the start of the income year in which a settlement is first made on the trust and ending before the date on which the trust ceases to be a complying trust under s HC 10(1)(a) (because trustee income derived includes non-resident passive income, non-residents’ foreign-sourced income or income that is exempt under s CW 54), and ▪ the trust ceases to be a complying trust under s HC 10(1)(a), and ▪ the trustee files returns on the basis that the trust is a complying trust for each income year after complying trust status is lost.  There is no requirement for any notice to be given to the Commissioner. In this case, the notional election applies on and after the start of the income year in which the trust ceases to be a complying trust and ends on the date of the relevant distribution. For a discussion of the rules relating to non-complying trusts becoming complying trusts, see Case Y25 (2008) 23 NZTC 13,270. In Case Y25 it was held that the trust was not a qualifying (complying) trust because not all of the trustee income had been subject to New Zealand tax. Changes from 23 March 2020 A number of remedial amendments have been made to the trust provisions to improve the clarity of the law and better reflect the policy intent. With respect to s HC 33, the first change relates to the notional election under s HC 33(1B). For the year in which the trust ceases to be a complying trust (the non-complying year), the trustee must meet the tax obligations of the trust and notify the Commissioner that the trust is a complying trust for that year— ▪ for a trustee that is required to file a return, in the return of income and by the due date for the return, or ▪ for a trustee that is not required to file a return, by the due date for a return required by s 59D of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) by a resident foreign trustee for the non-complying year. It is also clarified that if an election is made for a trust to pay tax on its worldwide trustee income, the trust must determine its tax obligations as if it has both a New Zealand resident trustee and a New Zealand resident settlor. The person making the election must then satisfy the tax obligations of the trustee on that basis. The date an election applies in situations other than when an election is made under s HC 33 as a result of the application of s HC 30 has also been clarified. In the case of a notional election under s  HC 33(1B), the election applies on and after the beginning of the non-complying year. In all other cases, the election applies on and after whichever date (the effective date) the person making the election chooses of— ▪ the date of the election (the electing date) ▪ the beginning of the income year (the electing year) that includes the electing date, or ▪ the beginning of an income year that is four years or less before the beginning of the electing year. Thus, a person is able to make a retrospective election for up to four years before the electing date. If the trustee of a trust is required to file a return of income, the person making the election for the trust must notify the Commissioner of the election and provide the Commissioner with the information required by s 113F of the TAA. Section 113F applies if the person making the election chooses to make it retrospective. In that case, the person must provide the Commissioner with any information required in relation to the income years to which the election applies that end before the electing year. An election under s HC 33(1B) is effective until the beginning of an income year for which the trustee does not meet its tax obligations or does not notify the Commissioner the trust is a complying trust in the same manner as set out above for a non-complying year. The tax treatment of a distribution of tax-paid trustee income or a capital gain from a trust that has elected to become a complying trust, other than when an election is made under s HC 33 as a result of the application of s HC 30, has also been clarified. The tax treatment is as follows: ▪ A distribution made before the beginning of the electing year has the taxation consequences that it would have in the absence of the election.  ▪ A distribution made after the beginning of the electing year from income derived by the trustee before the effective date is treated as being a distribution by a trust having the status of foreign trust, non-complying trust or complying trust that the trust had when the income is derived. ▪ A distribution made after the beginning of the electing year from income derived on or after the effective date is treated as being made by the trustee as trustee of— □ a complying trust, if the requirements under s HC 10(1)(ab) are met (ie an election made under s HC 33 and the trustee’s tax obligations are satisfied for each tax year) for trustee income derived on or after the effective date, or □ a non-complying trust, in all other cases. For the purposes of the first two bullet points above, the amount derived before the effective date by the trustee in an income year that includes, but does not begin with, the effective date is: ▪ a proportion of the income derived in the income year equal to the proportion of the days in the income year that are before the effective date, or ▪ if the person does not choose to use the proportion approach, the amount derived before the effective date in the income year. The changes ensure that distributions from tax-paid trustee income are treated as being made from a complying trust only if the distribution is made from trustee income derived after the date from which the election applies. The ordering rules in s HC 16 are applied to determine the composition of a distribution. For example, a non-complying trust elects to be a complying trust in March 2021, for the year beginning 1 April 2020, and the tax obligations for that trustee income are fully complied with from 1 April 2020. However, all distributions from trustee income and capital gains earned before 1 April 2020 would continue being treated as a  distribution from a non-complying trust and included in a taxable distribution. The changes also ensure that only when all income and capital gains from the trust during the period it was a non-complying trust have been fully distributed will distributions be treated as being made from a complying trust. Note that if a person makes a retrospective election for a trust and the election results in an increase in the assessed income tax liability of the trustee or RWT payable by the trustee for an income year before the electing year, the person and the trustee are not liable for a penalty under the TAA. This does not apply if the Commissioner does not accept that the trustee’s tax position for each income year beginning on or after the effective date and before the electing year is none of: ▪ an unacceptable tax position under s 141B ▪ an abusive tax position under s 141D, or ▪ a tax position that causes the trustee to be liable to pay a shortfall penalty for evasion or a similar act under s 141E. Law: IT07 ss HC 10(1), HC 33  ¶25-385 Complying trust becoming non-complying trust A complying trust may become a non-complying trust if no settlor is a New Zealand resident who is not a transitional resident (eg where the sole settlor of the trust emigrates from New Zealand or is a transitional resident) and the trust has foreign-sourced income. When a complying trust ceases to have a New Zealand resident settlor, the trustees of the trust (whether tax resident in New Zealand or not) may no longer be liable for tax on their foreign-sourced income. See ¶25-035. Where s CW 54 or HC 26 has applied to exempt foreign-sourced amounts from the income of the trustees of a complying trust, the trust ceases to be a complying trust and becomes a non-complying trust. See ¶25-245.  In order to avoid the consequences of a trust ceasing to be a complying trust in the above circumstances, a settlor, trustee or beneficiary of the trust can make an election under s HC 33 to satisfy the income tax liability of the trustee. However, notwithstanding any failure to make an election, a trustee will be treated as making an election under s HC 33 by continuing to file tax returns on that basis. See ¶25-365. With effect from 23 March 2020, it is clarified that an inactive trust (that is not required to file an annual return) has to notify the Commissioner on an annual basis that the election to pay New Zealand tax on worldwide trustee income is to continue in order to retain complying trust status. A complying trust may also become a non-complying trust where: ▪ the trustee of the trust is or becomes non-resident and derives trustee income that is only non-resident passive income, eg dividend or interest income from New Zealand, or ▪ the trustee fails to meet a tax obligation. See ¶25-245. Law: IT07 ss BD 1(3), (4), (5), CW 54, HC 25, HC 26, HC 28, HC 33  ¶25-395 Valuation of existing trust Where a trust that was not previously liable to New Zealand income tax on trustee income becomes liable, the cost for tax purposes of items such as premises, plant, machinery, equipment and trading stock is deemed (at the option of the person who is liable to pay the tax) to be either: ▪ the historical cost of the asset, less accumulated depreciation, or some other value used in any foreign country in which the trustee income has been liable to tax (but not exceeding market value at that date), or  ▪ the value that would apply had the trustee income been assessable income (other than only as non-resident passive income). The acquisition price for any financial arrangement is at the option of the person, either: ▪ market value of the financial arrangement at that date, or ▪ consideration paid to the person + expenditure − consideration paid by the person − income. Any existing trust will enter into the tax base when a non-resident settlor becomes resident in New Zealand. Law: IT07 s HC 31  TRUST ADMINISTRATION ¶25-405 Trust losses and allocation of income If a trust has tax losses, confusion can arise about the timing of the offset of those losses and the interplay between the allocation of trustee and beneficiary income. Example: A trust has tax losses but current-year accounting profits. If losses were offset against current-year income before the allocation between trustee and beneficiary income, there would be no income available to distribute to the beneficiaries. The trust deed should be referred to in the first instance to see whether it provides how losses shall be allocated between income and capital. If there is any current-year income in which the beneficiaries have a vested interest or that has been “paid” in terms of the income tax legislation, it seems that it is only the balance that is “trustee income”. It is at this point that any prior year losses are offset. Beneficiary income and trustee income are defined in ss HC 6 and HC 7 by reference to income derived, and under the core provisions of the Income Tax Act 2007, losses are offset after net income is determined. See ¶1-380. This order would mean the loss offset would apply after deciding the allocation between trustee and beneficiary income.  Tax losses can be offset against taxable distributions from a non-complying trust A beneficiary of a non-complying trust can apply a tax loss to reduce the amount of a taxable distribution from a non-complying trust that is derived in the corresponding income year. See ss HC 22 and IA 3(3), ¶25-305. Law: IT07 ss BC 4(4), HC 22, IA 3(3)  ¶25-425 Tax rates for trusts Trustee income Trustees are taxed at the flat rate of 33% on trustee income (see ¶25-035). The 33% rate is prescribed by sch 1 pt A cl 3 of the Income Tax Act 2007. The same rate applies whether the trustee is a trustee of a complying trust, foreign trust or non-complying trust. Beneficiary income A beneficiary is liable to tax on “beneficiary income” (see ¶25-065) at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. See sch 1 pt A cl 1. The same treatment applies whether the beneficiary is a beneficiary of a complying trust, foreign trust or non-complying trust. Taxable distributions “Taxable distributions” (see ¶25-305) received by beneficiaries of foreign trusts are also taxed at the beneficiary’s marginal rate of tax. Taxable distributions from a non-complying trust are not included in a beneficiary’s income but are taxed to the beneficiary at the penal rate of 45%. See sch 1 pt A cl 4. For beneficiaries of complying trusts, only distributions of beneficiary income are taxable. See ¶25-115 and ¶25-305. The tax treatment of trustee income, beneficiary income and taxable distributions may be illustrated by the following table. Summary  Distribution  Complying trust  Foreign trust  Noncomplying trust  Pre-1/4/88 accumulated funds  Exempt income Exempt income Exempt income  Corpus  Exempt income Exempt income Exempt income  Arm’s length capital profits  Exempt income Exempt income Taxed 45%  Non-arm’s length capital profits  Taxed at beneficiary’s marginal tax Exempt income rate  Taxed at 45%  Post-1/4/88 accumulated funds  Taxed at beneficiary’s marginal tax Exempt income rate  Taxed at 45%  Trustee income Taxed at 33%. Trustee liable as beneficiary’s agent.  Beneficiary income  Trustee income Trustee income derived from derived from New Zealand New Zealand taxed at 33%. taxed at 33%. Liable as Liable as beneficiary’s beneficiary’s agent. agent.  Taxed at beneficiary’s marginal tax rate in all cases except for beneficiary income derived by minor beneficiaries in certain circumstances.  Law: IT07 sch 1 pt A cls 3, 4  ¶25-445 Trustee’s return of income  A trustee is required to furnish a return of income on form IR 6 showing all income derived in the capacity of trustee, whether beneficiary income or trustee income. (Form IR 6B, “Estate or trust beneficiary details”, should also be attached.) Any amount derived by a trustee in an income year that is also beneficiary income is treated as being derived by the beneficiary in the income year that corresponds to the trustee’s income year. When two or more persons act as co-trustees, one return is filed jointly. Only income derived by the trust must be returned; non-trust income derived by a trustee in a personal capacity is taxed separately. However, the trustee is liable to tax on all trust income as if the trustee was beneficially entitled to that income. In the trustee’s tax return, the trustee will calculate the tax on the beneficiaries’ income and pay the tax on that income as agent of the beneficiary. The net income is then paid to the beneficiary. ▸Note: Changes made in December 2020 mean that, from the 2021– 22 income year, trustees are also required to provide information on the financial position of the trust as part of the trustee’s tax return. In addition, the Commissioner also has the power to request the information for certain prior years. See further at ¶2-050. Non-active trading trusts Section 43B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 allows non-active trusts to apply to be exempted from the obligation to file. See ¶2027. Law: IT07 s HC 6(3); TAA ss 43B, 59BA, 59BAB  ¶25-465 Beneficiary’s return of income A beneficiary must include in the beneficiary’s own return of income the beneficiary’s share of any beneficiary income or taxable distribution. The beneficiary income must be included in the tax return for the same income year as the trust included the beneficiary income in its tax return. For example, beneficiary income paid after the end of the 2018–19 income year (to the extent that the income  satisfies the definition of beneficiary income) must be included in the beneficiary’s 2018–19 tax return. See ¶25-065. A beneficiary may claim a credit for tax paid by the trustee as agent of the beneficiary. In some instances, Inland Revenue (IR) will agree to the beneficiary returning the beneficiary’s share of beneficiary income and paying the provisional and terminal tax thereon. IR agrees to direct assessment of the beneficiary (commonly referred to as having the income “transferred direct”) when the beneficiary has suffered a loss in the beneficiary’s own right, the beneficiary’s income from sources other than the trust is insufficient to absorb the tax credit entitlement, and the beneficiary accepts the responsibility to pay provisional tax and furnish a return. Direct assessment of a beneficiary does not relieve the trustee of the responsibility to furnish a return of income for the trust’s other income. Nor does it relieve the trustee of the liability to pay any tax owing should the beneficiary default. Law: TAA s 33  ¶25-485 Disclosure of trust particulars Settlors of certain trusts where there is no resident trustee, and a settlement is made after 17 December 1987, must disclose the existence of the trust and details of its trustees and beneficiaries to the Commissioner. Disclosure is required when: ▪ a settlor is resident and there is no resident trustee at the time of settlement — the settlor must make a disclosure within three months of the date of settlement ▪ a settlor is resident and any time after settlement of a trust there is no resident trustee — the settlor must make disclosure within three months of the date on which the trust ceased to have a resident trustee, and  ▪ a person who is a New Zealand resident makes a settlement on a trust as nominee for another person and there is no resident trustee at settlement — the disclosure must be made within three months of date of settlement. Disclosure is made on form IR 462, “Settlors of trusts disclosure”. In Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 4, October 1995 at 10, the Commissioner specified that the following information must be provided in such disclosure required under s 59 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA): ▪ details of the settlement, including the date of the original settlement and dates of any subsequent settlements ▪ the market value of the property transferred ▪ any consideration received by the settlor for the property ▪ the trustees’ and beneficiaries’ names and addresses ▪ a copy of the trust deed ▪ the names and addresses of the persons for whom the nominee is acting (if a nominee is required to make a disclosure), and ▪ any other information that the Commissioner may require. If the property settled includes land, the Commissioner requires the legal description and location of the property. If the property includes shares, then details of the number, type, name of the company and the country of incorporation are required. If the property includes financial arrangements, details of the parties to the financial arrangement, interest rate and term must be supplied. If the property includes services, the nature of the service and the consideration paid must also be disclosed. The disclosure requirements do not apply to trusts that are superannuation funds. Failure to disclose trust details as required may result in the Commissioner determining the amount of trustee income for an  income year. See s 93B. For disclosure requirements for foreign trusts, see ¶25-488. Non-disclosure — penalties and other consequences Section 143A imposes a penalty on all persons, including settlors and trustees, who knowingly do not provide information about a trust or keep proper records. A person who aids, abets or incites either of these offences is liable to the same penalty. See ¶14-250 and ¶14285. In respect of settlors, the penalties for non-disclosure or knowingly giving false information can subject the settlor to a fine of up to $50,000. Also, if disclosure is not made, the Commissioner may determine the amount of trustee income derived by the trust (see ¶25-035). Consequently, a great deal of care is required as the definition of “settlor” is extremely wide (see ¶25-185). Law: TAA ss 59, 93B, 143A  ¶25-488 Disclosure by resident foreign trustees of foreign trusts With effect from 21 February 2017, New Zealand’s foreign trust disclosure rules have been strengthened. The disclosure requirements are imposed on a resident foreign trustee of a foreign trust. A “resident foreign trustee” is a New Zealand resident person acting as a trustee of a foreign trust. Note that previously a foreign trust that was also a registered charity was exempted from the foreign trust disclosure rules. However, this exemption was removed with effect from 1 April 2019. Note that the disclosure requirements will apply in relation to certain foreign trusts that are also complying trusts — see discussion on dual status trusts at ¶25-225. Registration process Resident foreign trustees of a foreign trust are required to register the foreign trust and pay a prescribed fee. An exemption from this  fee applies for resident foreign trustees if they are natural persons who are not in the business of providing trustee services. This is to address concerns that fees could amount to a reasonably large portion of the trust’s annual income for some family trusts. The trustee making application for registration of a foreign trust (the contact trustee) is responsible for communicating with the Commissioner for the trust and has to provide the following information in relation to the trust: ▪ the name of the trust ▪ the date, amount, settlor and nature of each relevant settlement on the trust (see below) ▪ the name, email address, physical residential or business address, jurisdiction of tax residence, taxpayer identification number and connection with the trust of: □ each settlor who makes a relevant settlement □ each person with a power to appoint or dismiss a trustee, to amend the trust deed or to add or remove a beneficiary, and each person with a power to control such a power □ each person with a power to control a trustee in the administration of the trust □ each trustee □ for a fixed trust, each beneficiary that is not a minor and each nominee for a beneficiary □ for a fixed trust and a beneficiary who is a minor, the parent or guardian of the beneficiary ▪ for a fixed trust and a beneficiary who is a minor, the name, age and taxpayer identification number of the beneficiary  ▪ for a discretionary trust, details of each beneficiary or class of beneficiary sufficient for the Commissioner to determine whether a person is a beneficiary when a distribution is made under the trust, and ▪ a copy of the trust deed (or its functional equivalent) and each document that amends or supplements the trust deed (or its functional equivalent). Inland Revenue has published the following forms to be completed for registration of a foreign trust: IR 607 Foreign trust registration form (March 2019), IR 607A Foreign trust connected person schedule (March 2017), and IR 900A Foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule (March 2017). In addition, the contact trustee must provide a signed declaration that all those persons listed under the third bullet point above have been informed of and have agreed to provide the information relating to the trust necessary to comply with the provision of information requirements in the Tax Administration Act 1994 and the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009, and regulations made under these Acts, or they are deceased or unable to be located. A relevant settlement is a settlement (other than a provision of minor services incidental to the activities of the trust made at less than market value) made in the period ending with the date of the application and beginning with: ▪ if the trustee is not a natural person or is in the business of providing trustee services — the date on which the trust is formed ▪ if the trustee is a natural person or is not in the business of providing trustee services and the trustee becomes required to register the trust on enactment of the new rules— the later of the date the trust is formed and 30 June 2013, or  ▪ if neither of the above two bullet points apply — the later of the date the trust is formed and the date that is four years before the earliest date on which a trustee becomes required to register the trust. In other words, for non-natural person trustees and other professional trustees all historical settlements (other than the minor services and incidental activity exception) are relevant. For natural person trustees and non-professional trustees, only historical settlements made within a maximum four-year time period are relevant. Example 1: Natalie and Greg’s family trust was formed in April 2016 and Dan, a New Zealand tax resident, is appointed one of the trustees. All of the trustees are natural persons not in the business of providing trustee services. As part of the application for registration of the family trust, Dan must provide details of historical settlements. The later of April 2016 and 30 June 2013 is April 2016, so Dan must provide details of settlements since that date.  Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 32. When a contact trustee intends to cease being the contact trustee, they must provide the following details to the Commissioner: ▪ the anticipated date they will cease to be the contact trustee ▪ their email address and physical residential address after the anticipated date, and ▪ the name, email address and physical residential or business address of the replacement contact trustee after the anticipated date. Note that if a foreign trust has more than one resident foreign trustee, each resident foreign trustee is responsible for performance of the obligations relating to registration of the trust, disclosure of  information, annual returns, financial statements and payment of fees. Time limits for registration and disclosure of information Foreign trusts formed after 21 February 2017 must register with Inland Revenue within 30 days of establishing. Existing foreign trusts at 21 February 2017 had to register by 30 June 2017. An additional four-year grace period (from the earliest date on which a trustee of the foreign trust becomes a resident foreign trustee) for meeting the registration requirements applies for the trustee if: ▪ each trustee of the foreign trust is a natural person ▪ for each resident foreign trustee of the foreign trust, the foreign trust is the first trust for which the trustee has been a resident foreign trustee, and ▪ each trustee of the foreign trust is not in the business of providing trustee services. Example 2: Ralph was appointed as a trustee of his friend Nora’s trust on 13 January 2014. Nora is the only settlor of this trust and is not a New Zealand resident. Ralph is not in the business of providing trustee services, and as a New Zealand tax resident, he is a resident foreign trustee. Under the previous disclosure rules, Ralph was required to disclose particular information to Inland Revenue by 12 February 2014. After Royal assent of the Taxation (Business Tax, Exchange of Information, and Remedial Matters) Bill (21 February 2017), Ralph is now required to apply for registration of Nora’s trust. Because Ralph is not in the business of providing trustee services, he is eligible for the grace period provided for by new section 59C(3). The grace period of four years and 30 days is counted from the date that Ralph became a resident foreign trustee (13 January 2014). This means Ralph has until 12 February 2018 to apply for the registration of Nora’s trust. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 31.  If any of the information required to be provided on registration later alters, the contact trustee must provide details of the addition or alteration, as well as any signed declaration required as a  consequence of the addition or alteration, within 30 days of becoming aware of the addition or alteration. Annual returns A resident foreign trustee must provide an annual return for every year that the trust is registered and pay a prescribed fee. An exemption from this fee applies if all the resident foreign trustees of the foreign trust are natural persons who are not in the business of providing trustee services. The “return year” corresponds with the date for which the resident foreign trustee prepares (or is required to prepare) financial statements (the “balance date”) or, if the trustee does not (and is not required to) prepare financial statements, 31 March. The requirement is intended to apply for years ending after 31 March 2017 or, if the grace period discussed above applies, after the expiration of the grace period. The due date for the annual returns is six months after the trust’s balance date, or 30 September following the end of the return year if the trust does not have a balance date because it does not prepare financial statements. Note that officials have indicated that an Order in Council should be made under s 21C of the TAA to specify the minimum standards for financial statements for a foreign trust. The return must provide the following information: ▪ the trust’s financial statements for the return year if the trustee prepares, or is required to prepare, financial statements ▪ the date, amount and nature of each settlement (other than the provision to the trustee of minor services incidental to the activities of the trust at less than market value) made on the trust in the return year ▪ the name, email address, physical residential or business address, jurisdiction of tax residence, and tax identification number of each settlor making the settlement  ▪ the date, amount, and nature of each distribution made by the trustee in the return year and the name of the beneficiary who receives the distribution ▪ for each beneficiary to which a distribution is made: □ the email address, physical residential address, jurisdiction of tax residence, and tax identification number of the beneficiary, or □ if the beneficiary is a minor, the age, jurisdiction of tax residence, and tax identification number of the beneficiary and the name, email address, physical residential address, jurisdiction of tax residence and taxpayer identification number of the parent or guardian of the beneficiary. Inland Revenue has stated the following forms must be completed annually: IR 900 Foreign trust annual return (March 2019) and IR 900A. Fees The prescribed fee for an application for registration of a foreign trust is $270 (incl GST). The fee for an annual return is $50 (incl GST). Provision is made for regulations to be made to change the fees. An exemption from the fee is allowed if all the resident foreign trustees of the foreign trust are natural persons not in the business of providing trustee services. Loss of tax exemption A foreign trust with a resident foreign trustee loses its tax exemption for foreign-sourced amounts unless the trustee has registered the trust and fulfilled the associated disclosure obligations at the time the foreign-sourced amount is derived. An appropriate transitional period was provided for existing foreign trusts to register following enactment of the new rules without running the risk of losing the exemption (see ¶25-035). The eligibility for an exemption on foreign-sourced income of the trust is assessed on a year-by-year basis. Accordingly, a foreign trust  that fails to register on time will lose its exemption for that year. However, if it later registers and fulfils its annual reporting obligations it will be able to get the exemption for those years. Information sharing The Commissioner is able to share information relating to a foreign trust’s registration with the Department of Internal Affairs and the New Zealand Police. Law: TAA ss 3(1), 18H, 59B, 59C, 59D, 59E, sch 7 cl 28  TRADING TRUSTS ¶25-505 Trading trusts A trading trust may be used as an alternative to other business structures such as the traditional limited liability company. A trading trust is essentially a trust that carries on a business. A suitable deed for a trading trust will generally: ▪ confer wide powers and discretions on trustees (eg the power to carry on a business, the power to hold non-diversified, high-risk investments, and wide borrowing and lending powers) ▪ make provision for a corporate trustee (if required), and ▪ contain an adequate indemnity for trustees. If the trustee of a trading trust is a corporate trustee, there must be compliance with trust and tax law obligations together with company law obligations. Tax rates Trading trusts can provide the opportunity to achieve tax savings. The trustee of a trading trust is taxed on the same basis as any other trustee. See ¶25-035. In broad terms, if the trust is a complying trust, income derived by the trustee in an income year that is distributed as beneficiary income is taxed at the beneficiaries’ marginal rates of  tax. Income that is not so distributed is taxed at the trustee rate (currently 33%). Capital gains may also be distributed to beneficiaries tax free. This may be contrasted with a company other than a qualifying company or a look-through company (LTC), that can only distribute capital gains to shareholders tax free if it goes into liquidation. There are obvious tax savings in distributing beneficiary income to beneficiaries who have a tax rate that is less than the trustee rate or a nil tax rate, eg a registered charity or a person with tax losses. However, the opportunity to distribute income to beneficiaries with low marginal rates of tax is limited to a certain extent by the minor beneficiary rule. See ¶25-045. Fringe benefit tax If benefits are provided to a beneficiary who is not an employee of the trust or a person associated with an employee, fringe benefit tax (FBT) should not apply because the beneficiary is not receiving the benefit as an employee. No deduction is available to the trust for any expenses incurred in providing the benefit. If the beneficiary is also an employee of the trading trust, arguably no FBT liability arises in respect of benefits, provided the beneficiaryemployee enjoys the benefit in his or her capacity as a beneficiary, not as an employee. The trustees should document the provision of the benefit clearly stating that the beneficiary-employee enjoys the benefit in his or her capacity as a beneficiary. ACC levies A trust must pay Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) levies like any other employer. Accordingly, if the trust employs a beneficiary, ACC levies will be payable by the trust (and by the beneficiary-employee) in relation to liable earnings (eg salary and wages) paid to the beneficiary-employee. Distributions to beneficiaries in their capacity as such (not being earnings as employees) would not attract ACC levies. Distributions to beneficiaries in their capacity as beneficiaries should be recorded accurately in a trustees’ resolution.  Losses While the trustees of a trading trust can carry forward tax losses, the losses cannot be passed on to beneficiaries. In comparison, losses of an LTC can be allocated to the company’s owners in proportion to each ownership interest. See subpart HB and ¶19-155. Anti-avoidance There is a possibility of the general anti-avoidance provisions in ss BG 1 and GA 1 applying to trading trusts where tax savings result. This possibility is substantially increased if an existing business is transferred to a trading trust, particularly if the business income is primarily generated by the personal exertion of the previous owner of the business. The possibility is lower if a new business is established or the business income is primarily generated by property rather than personal exertion. See Case V20 (2002) 20 NZTC 10,233 and Case W33 (2004) 21 NZTC 11,321. Payment of a below market salary Payment of a below market salary can amount to tax avoidance. Where this is because a company lacks funds to pay market rates, this will not necessarily amount to tax avoidance. See White v C of IR (2010) 24 NZTC 24,600. However, where salaries are fixed at an artificially low level, and there are sufficient funds to pay a higher salary, this can constitute tax avoidance in a trading trust structure. See the Supreme Court decision in Penny and Hooper v C of IR (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-073; [2011] NZSC 95. In this case two orthopaedic surgeons practicing on their own account restructured their practice arrangements. Under the new arrangements a company that was substantially owned by a family trust was set up to purchase each practice. Following the restructure each taxpayer was employed by the respective companies at a salary the Commissioner considered to be artificially low. The balance of the practice income in each case was treated as company income and paid by way of shareholder dividend to the family trusts.  In its decision the Supreme Court noted that there was no question of the taxpayers failing to comply with specific taxation provisions. The trading structure adopted by the taxpayers was a choice they were entitled to make. There was also nothing unusual or artificial in a taxpayer then causing the company under his control to employ him on a salaried basis. Despite this the Supreme Court said that although compliance in other respects was accepted, the use of the structure that was adopted when the salaries were fixed was beyond parliamentary contemplation and accordingly, the use of the below market salaries comprised a tax avoidance arrangement. While such a proposition does not provide clear or quantifiable guidance the Supreme Court also outlined situations where a below market salary would not amount to tax avoidance: ▪ where a salary was set to a level that would absorb all company profits ▪ a company in financial difficulty had insufficient funds to pay a market salary ▪ retention of funds in order to make capital expenditure. See further at ¶33-105. See Revenue Alert RA 11/02, “Diverting personal services income by structuring revenue earning activities through an associated entity such as a trading trust or a company: the circumstances when Inland Revenue will consider this arrangement is tax avoidance”. In Revenue Alert 11/02 the Commissioner acknowledges that there are legitimate reasons for using entities such as trusts in many business situations and goes on to consider the circumstances where the payment of a below market salary may constitute tax avoidance. However, where a business involves the provision of services, IR is more likely to closely examine arrangements where the individual service provider is not receiving a significant portion of the profits derived from the business. This will be particularly so where there is an absence of commerciality in the arrangements  entered into and/or non-tax reasons to justify a lower level of remuneration. Although RA 11/02 provides that IR’s approach will focus on the commercial reality of the business and not on “market” salaries or comparable industry averages, the Revenue Alert also provides that it is more likely to investigate arrangements where the service provider’s remuneration is less than 80% of total distributions received by the service provider, the service provider’s family and associated entities. For a more detailed discussion of some of the commercial and tax issues associated with trading trusts, see the article “Trading trust issues” by Roger Thompson in CCH, New Zealand Tax Planning Report, No 2, May 2000, and the article “Trading trusts and tax avoidance” by Stephen Tomlinson in CCH, New Zealand Tax Updater, No 4, May 2003. Also see the Law Commission issues paper (IP 28) “Court Jurisdiction, Trading Trusts and Other Issues”. Beneficiary advances can amount to tax avoidance The general anti-avoidance provisions can also be applied to recharacterise current account advances made from the trustee of a trading trust to a beneficiary. In Krukziener v C of IR (No 3) (2010) 24 NZTC 24,563 current account loans of long standing made to a beneficiary were recharacterised as income. The High Court found that the history of loans that did not have recorded terms and where no demand for repayment was ever made, comprised a tax deferral arrangement that constituted tax avoidance. See further at ¶33-010, ¶33-085 and ¶33-105.  DEATH AND DECEASED ESTATES ¶25-525 Trustee return — deceased estate The executor or administrator of a deceased person is required to furnish any returns which the deceased would have been liable to furnish had he or she remained alive.  This means that the executor or administrator must furnish any necessary returns of income for the year ended on the previous 31 March (or other balance date) if not already filed by the deceased, and for the period 1 April (or other balance date) to the date of death. The return of income up to the date of death must include all assessable income of the deceased that would be assessable income derived as at that date. Note that the terms of the deceased person’s will can be relevant in determining whether income is income of the deceased or income that must be accounted for as trustee or beneficiary income. See ¶25-585. The Commissioner may require the furnishing of such further returns relating to the income of the deceased as he thinks necessary. Income tax assessed in respect of a deceased person is deemed to be a liability incurred by the deceased during his or her lifetime and the executor or administrator is liable for its payment. However, liability for income tax in respect of income derived by the deceased before death is limited to the net assets of the estate. This includes tax that may be assessed as the consequence of the Commissioner reopening prior year assessments. Note that the Commissioner can write off outstanding tax if a deceased person’s estate has been distributed. In the case of a deceased person who was subject to the reporting of income information provisions in Pt 3, subpart 3B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (see ¶2-016), the executor or administrator will have to supply any necessary information on income and expenses of the deceased and will have to finalise the deceased’s account with Inland Revenue. Final trust return If the final distribution of estate assets or trust income is to be made, the trustee should ensure that sufficient funds have been reserved to meet all tax obligations which will or may prove to be payable either in the trustee’s own right or as agent of the beneficiaries. This is because the trustee may be liable for any shortfall. See The Public Trustee v Flower (1991) 13 NZTC 8,042. This is not to say, however, that the trustee is absolutely liable for the trust tax. An estate could  be insolvent and, in such a case, the trustee is not personally liable. The trustee should furnish a final tax return for the trust covering the period from the preceding 1 April to the date of final distribution. Law: TAA ss 43, 177C(2)  ¶25-545 Income to be returned by trustee of deceased estate Income that is accrued at the date of death but that is received by the trustees after that date is treated as trustee income. This may not be included in the deceased’s return to the date of death. Dividend income may be apportioned between periods covering before and after death when the income is received after the date of death but is for a fixed period commencing before the date of death. Generally, Inland Revenue accepts any apportionment made by the trustees and executors. When an apportionment is made, the income allocated to the period before the date of death is treated as trustee income if it was not derived by the deceased during his or her lifetime. Assessment of the income allocated to the period after the date of death depends upon how the income is to be dealt with in terms of the will. Example 1: Mr TP is a retired farmer holding shares in XYZ Ltd. His income year ends on 30 June. Mr TP dies on 1 April. On 30 June, XYZ Ltd declares a dividend amounting to $600 in Mr TP’s hands. The dividend is stated to relate to the period 1 November to 30 April. Mr TP’s trustee may apportion the payment as follows: $ To date of death  500  Balance of dividend period  100 600  Interest income that accrues on a day-to-day basis is treated as income to which the deceased was entitled in his or her lifetime and  is taxable as deceased’s income. Other interest that is accrued at the date of death but received subsequently is treated as trustee income. Interest derived after the date of death that relates to a period after that date is treated as trustee or beneficiary income, depending upon the terms of the will. Rental income is taxed on the same basis as interest income. The appropriate portion of the year’s fixed charges may be deducted from that income. This approach is to be applied to items such as rates, insurance, interest and depreciation. Trading stock on hand at the date of death must be brought in at the market value at the date of death. Professional fees actually received up to the date of death are returnable for doctors and barristers who have previously furnished returns on a cash basis. Fees for the value of all work completed by the date of death are returnable for other professionals, even though an account may not have been rendered before the date of death. Fees for work completed by or on behalf of the trustees after the date of death should be returned in the estate return of income for the year in which an account was rendered. Effect of certain disposals — asset transfer rules Transfers of property following a person’s death (as well as in-kind distributions of property by trusts and companies, and gifts of property) are treated as disposals and acquisitions at market value (the asset transfer rules). There are a number of specific rules for property transferred on a person’s death or on final distribution of an estate. The transfer of property from a deceased estate to the administrator or executor of the estate is treated as occurring on the date that is immediately before the date of death. This means that the tax liabilities on the transfer of the property must be included in the deceased person’s final tax return to the date of death. For cost compliance reasons, there are some specific exceptions for transfers of some property in relation to deceased estates. Surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner  The asset transfer rules do not apply to a disposal of property under the terms of a will or intestacy to the surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner if all of the property in the tax base of the deceased is transferred to the surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner; or a person within the second degree of relationship to the deceased (for example, children, siblings or grandchildren of the deceased). Property in the tax base is property of the following types: ▪ revenue account property ▪ an interest in a FIF (foreign investment fund) ▪ a financial arrangement (excluding a financial arrangement in respect of which the deceased or a trustee of the deceased was a cash basis person), and ▪ depreciable property. Transfers of such property are treated as a transfer under a relationship agreement, that is, the assets are transferred at tax book value. The effect of this exception is that the tax consequences of the transfer of the property are realised when the transferee disposes of the inherited property. Simple estates On the final distribution of a deceased estate, there is no deemed disposal and acquisition at market value of property transferred that was in the tax base of the deceased, if the final beneficiaries are: ▪ persons within the second degree of relationship to the deceased person, or ▪ charities and the following apply: ▪ there is no life interest established by the estate  ▪ no property of the deceased is required by the estate to be held in trust (other than for the period in which the property is subject to administration or executorship), and ▪ while the administration of the estate is continuing, the net income of the estate is distributed beneficially to the maximum extent that is legally allowable. In this case, the transfer of property from the administrator or executor to the final beneficiaries is treated as a transfer of property under a relationship agreement. Generally, this means that the property is transferred at the trustee’s tax book value. Assuming all of the other conditions are met, this exception still applies if property that was not in the tax base of the deceased is distributed to beneficiaries who are not within the second degree of relationship to the deceased. See the examples below. Further, if this exception (and no other exception) applies, there is still a deemed disposal and acquisition at market value when the property that was in the tax base of the deceased is transferred from the deceased’s estate to the administrator or executor of the estate. Therefore, this exemption is a partial concession to the asset transfer rules. Example 2: Joe (a widower) died on 5 October. Tony is the executor of Joe’s estate. Included in the assets in the estate are a residential rental property (the only property in Joe’s tax base), $5,000 cash and a valuable collection of antiques (Joe collected antiques as a hobby when he was alive). The final beneficiaries of Joe’s estate are his son, Andy, Joe’s niece, Adele, and the Red Cross. Tony makes the final distribution of Joe’s estate on 28 March of the following year. Under the terms of Joe’s will, Tony distributes the residential rental property to Andy, the $5,000 cash to the Red Cross and the collection of antiques to Adele. Joe’s will does not establish any life interest or require any of Joe’s property to be held in trust. Despite the fact that Adele (a relative of Joe who is not within the second degree of relationship) is included in Joe’s will as a final beneficiary, the exception for the final distribution of a simple estate still applies. This is because Andy (a relative of Joe who is within the second degree of relationship) receives the residential property. Accordingly, the transfer of the residential property from Tony to Andy will be made at  the tax book value of the estate. Any tax consequences of the transfer will be realised when Andy subsequently disposes of the property.  Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, except the residential rental property is distributed to Adele and the collection of antiques is distributed to Andy. In this case, the exception will not apply. There will be a deemed disposal and acquisition at market value of the residential rental property distributed to Adele.  Depreciable property If the exceptions for a distribution to a surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner or for a simple estate apply (see above), there will be no deemed acquisition at market value of the depreciable property transferred. Instead, there will be a deemed acquisition at either the cost or tax book value of the transferor in accordance with the rules for the transfer of property under a relationship agreement. See s FB 21 and ¶13-580. This gives full effect to the rollover relief provided for in the exceptions. A person who receives depreciable property by way of a bequest under the asset transfer rules can use the market value of the asset determined in accordance with those rules as the cost base to calculate that person’s depreciation loss on the asset. Example 4: Jessica inherits a rental property from her great aunt. Jessica decides to keep the property as an investment. Under the asset transfer rules, the transfer of the property from Jessica’s great aunt’s estate to Jessica is treated as a transfer at market value. The estate must include in its final tax return any depreciation recovery income or depreciation loss arising on the transfer of the rental property. Jessica will be allowed to calculate the depreciation loss on the rental property based on the market value at which it was transferred to her.  See also ¶13-600. Trading stock  If the exceptions for a distribution to a surviving spouse, civil union or de facto partner or for a simple estate apply (see above), there will be no deemed acquisition at market value of trading stock transferred. As in the case of a transfer of depreciable property, this gives full effect to the rollover relief provided for in the exceptions. Timber The transfer of property that is timber, standing timber or the right to take timber is made at tax book value if the property is disposed of to a person within the second degree of relationship to the deceased (for example, the surviving spouse, de facto or civil union partner, children, siblings or grandchildren of the deceased). This applies when the property is transferred from the deceased person to the executor or administrator of the estate and also when the final distribution is made to beneficiaries. Land The distribution of land that would have been subject to tax under “the ten-year rule” if it had been sold by the deceased, will not be taxable under that rule, provided the land is distributed to a person within the second degree of relationship to the deceased (for example, the spouse, de facto or civil union partner, children, siblings or grandchildren of the deceased). This applies when the property is transferred from the deceased person to the executor or administrator of the estate and also when the final distribution is made to beneficiaries. Briefly, “the ten-year rule” is the disposal of land by: ▪ a land dealer or a land developer within 10 years of acquiring it ▪ a builder within 10 years of completing improvements to it, or ▪ a person who has disposed of land within 10 years of acquisition for more than its cost, and at least 20% of the excess received is due to various rules or zoning changes that relate to that land. If there is no relief from the application of the ten-year rule, a deduction is allowed to the executor or administrator or the final  beneficiary for: ▪ the cost of the land to the deceased person, and ▪ all other costs incurred by the deceased person and the executor or administrator or the beneficiary that have not previously been deducted. With effect for land acquired on or after 1 October 2015, the effect of a person’s death on the bright-line test in s CB 6A for the disposal of residential land within five years of acquisition (two years for land acquired before 29 March 2018) (see ¶7-050) is addressed in s FC 9. Rollover relief is provided for all transfers following a death and an exemption for any disposals by the executor or administrator or subsequent disposals by the beneficiaries. See further at ¶7-405. Financial arrangements The transfer of a financial arrangement by a deceased estate to the executor or administrator of the estate or on final distribution of the estate is made at cost, provided that the trustee of the estate is a cash basis person. The trustee of an estate can be treated as a cash basis person if the deceased person was a cash basis person at the date of death. Unexpired prepayments The transfer of unexpired prepayments by a deceased estate to the executor or administrator of the estate or on the final distribution of the estate is made at cost. The date of the valuation is the end of the income year. See s FC 7. Law: IT07 subpart FC, ss CV 12, EW 36, EW 40, FC 7, HC 8  ¶25-565 Deductions available to trustee of deceased estate Certain expenses may be claimed in the annual total deduction amount (see ¶1-380) for the return of taxable income to the date of death.  Fixed charges are deductible on a proportionate basis according to the number of days covering the period from the beginning of the income year to the date of death. These include items such as rates, interest, insurance, rents and depreciation. For other expenses that are not of a fixed nature, a deduction is available only if the liability for the expenses has been incurred on or before the date of death. Provided that this test has been met, it does not matter that the expenses are actually paid by the trustee after the date of death. Items here include matters such as repairs and maintenance and legal expenses.  ¶25-585 Ascertaining beneficiary income of deceased estate There are several matters that commonly arise in ascertaining beneficiary income. Some of the more common are as follows. Income accrued to date of death A will may specifically state that no apportionment is to be made between income and capital. In such cases, income accrued to date of death would be trustee income or beneficiary income depending on whether the income vests absolutely in the interest in the beneficiaries. See ¶25-035 and ¶25-065. Bad debts A deduction is allowed for bad debts if they have previously been included in the income of the deceased or in trustee income and the debts are written off. The deduction is allowed against trustee income with the balance, if any, deducted from the income of a beneficiary to the extent that the loss is chargeable against the capital of that beneficiary. When income is insufficient to absorb the loss, the loss may be carried forward and deducted in the next tax year on the same basis. Should the debt subsequently be recovered, it would be treated as trustee income. The exception is if the debt was written off against the income of a particular beneficiary. In such a case, it would be treated as income in the hands of that beneficiary. See ¶5-340 and ¶10-152.  Depreciation If the trust has purchased depreciable assets for deriving income or carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving income, it is entitled to claim depreciation. See ¶25-545. Loss carried forward Net losses incurred by a taxpayer in one income year are generally available for carry-forward and offset against net income in subsequent income years. However, such net losses are lost upon death and unable to be carried forward against income derived by a taxpayer’s deceased estate. This is because, for tax purposes, the estate is a different taxpayer. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 2, August 1995 at 31. When the trustee has the power to carry on a business, any loss arising out of that business is a loss to the trustee and not the beneficiaries. The resulting net loss may be carried forward and deducted from trustee income derived in a future income year. Example: Trustees were permitted to deduct the loss suffered in one income year from the profits made in the following income year. The Court of Appeal rejected the Commissioner’s contention that there was a clear indication in the will of the testator’s intention that losses should not be recouped out of subsequent profits but out of capital. See Rutherford v C of IR [1965] NZLR 444.  When an estate incurs a loss, that loss is considered by the Commissioner to have been incurred by the trustee and not by the beneficiaries. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 1, July 1995 at 19. See also ¶25-405 for discussion on trust tax losses and the allocation of income. However, if the beneficiary has a vested share in the year the loss is sustained, the loss may be carried forward and offset against beneficiary income. The same treatment may also apply when the trustee carries on the business as a bare trustee (ie not under authority of the will but with agreement of the beneficiaries after the point of distribution). In some  instances, the trustee is authorised to recoup losses from future beneficiary income. When the trustee exercises any such power, the beneficiary is taxed on net income for the year after deduction of the loss recouped by the trustee. Law: IT07 ss CG 3, DB 32, IA 1–IA 4  VARIATION, RESETTLEMENT AND WINDING UP OF TRUSTS ¶25-605 Variation of trusts A trust may be varied by the trustees if the deed of trust contains a power of variation; or, in the absence of an express power, if all the beneficiaries are of age and consent to the variation (Re Philips New Zealand Ltd [1997] 1 NZLR 93). The extent of any power of variation depends on the terms of the deed that contains the power (Kearns v Hill (1990) 21 NSWLR 107, Chief Commr of Stamp Duties v Buckle (1998) 151 ALR 1). Also see De Bernardo v De Bernardo (2010) 3 NZTR ¶20-011, Shanks v Shanks (2010) 3 NZTR ¶20-021 and McKnight v Craig (2010) 3 NZTR ¶20-019. A trust can also be varied pursuant to a statutory power of variation (Trustee Act 1956, ss 64, 64A (from 30 January 2021, s 122 of the Trusts Act 2019)) or the court’s inherent jurisdiction (Chapman v Chapman [1954] 1 All ER 798 (HL)). Although variations are common in practice, the taxation consequences are not always clear. The tax consequences of a variation depend on the extent of variation Variations run from changes to deeds of trust for administrative reasons, or to reflect legislative amendment, to changes that affect beneficial interests. The consequences of a variation depend on the extent of variation. A variation of a minor nature such as a change of the trust’s name will not have tax consequences because there is no alteration to the rights or obligations pursuant to the trust.  However, where a fundamental variation of trust occurs, such that there is in fact a new trust or trusts, it is necessary to consider the tax consequences of the variation. In this regard a distinction can be made between a variation of dispositive powers and a variation of administrative powers in a trust. Variations to dispositive powers will include, for example, changes to beneficial interests, or the manner in which a beneficiary might benefit. Such variations may have a tax consequence. An administrative change will usually relate to the administration of a trust and such variations will likely be neutral — unless, for example, the residence of the trustee changes as a result. A general power to vary trust powers usually only includes variation of administrative powers. However, a power to resettle will involve dispositive powers. Regardless of these general guidelines, difficulty lies in determining the nature of a variation at trust law so that any tax law consequences can be correctly identified. These tax consequences arise, not from the fact of the variation, but owing to the disposition of property in the tax base. Generally, these are the consequences that arise from a loss of continuity of a trust or from any disposition of property onto new trustees as is the case in a resettlement. Other variations may have no effect on the trust structure but can have a tax effect because of a resultant impact on tax revenue following the variation. Where this is the case, although a court will not decline to approve a variation because of a loss of revenue to Inland Revenue (see, for example, Dalziell v Dalziell (2008) 2 NZTR ¶18-009), the trustee would be wise to assess any avoidance risk. The following statement from the report of the Australian Review of Business Taxation: A Tax System Redesigned: More Certainty, Equitable and Durable, July 1999 at 479 usefully summarises the uncertainty that prevails regarding the consequences of variation: An existing trust may cease and a new trust may be created as the result of changes to a trust deed, changes to the substance or nature of a beneficiary’s interest in the trust or changes to the  operation of a trust. Such changes can give rise to the resettlement of a trust for some legal purposes. However, neither trust law nor taxation law is clear about exactly what changes to a trust deed constitute the creation of a new trust. Whether a variation brings about a new trust is a matter of scale and degree The difficulty in matters of variation is to identify the point where changes are such that a new trust estate comes into existence as a consequence of a loss of continuity of the beneficial interests in the former trust. It is accepted that a fundamental variation can result in a new trust. However, as each case will turn on its own facts, the exact nature of change that may cause a new trust to come into existence is not always clear. The uncertainty surrounding variation has troubled trustees for many years. Although the question has been before various courts, the jurisprudence on the subject does not provide clear guidelines. For example, in Re Ball’s Settlement Trusts [1968] 1 WLR 899, Megarry VC states that: If an arrangement changes the whole substratum of the trust, then it may well be that it cannot be regarded as varying the trust. In the absence of a clear test as to what will amount to a change in the substratum, this proposition is of limited assistance. What is clear is that where a fundamental variation occurs, so that there is a new trust, as a matter of fact and law, there will be a taxable event for tax purposes (Swires (HMIT) v Renton [1991] BTC 362, Re Holmden’s Settlement Trusts; IR Commrs v Holmden [1968] AC 685; [1968] 1 All ER 148). The nature of any resultant tax liability will depend on the nature of the assets in the trust’s tax base and the application of the relevant tax laws. Where the identity or rights of the beneficiaries are altered (ie relating to dispositive powers and rights and interests in the trust fund), it is likely that a fundamental change has occurred. However,  this too is a matter of scale and degree as the position may not be the same where the beneficiary in question is a discretionary beneficiary rather than a beneficiary with a fixed entitlement. A variation in the class of beneficiaries may result in a new trust Identifiable beneficiaries are a pre-requisite of a valid trust. Although it is common for the beneficiaries of any trust to change over time, a variation of trust that results in a change of beneficial owner can represent the termination of a trust and the establishment of a new trust for different objects. The extent of variation of a beneficial interest required to effect a new trust is unclear. Although some decisions suggest that there can be no resettlement without a change of beneficial interest (Wedge v Acting Comptroller of Stamps (Vic) (1940) 64 CLR 75), what is less clear is the corollary position of how much the class of beneficiaries can change before a fundamental variation is effected. Some guidance is provided by FC of T v Commercial Nominees of Australia Ltd 2001 ATC 4336 where the High Court of Australia considered whether changes to a trust, including the introduction of a new class of beneficiaries, resulted in the creation of a new trust in the context of continuity of a superannuation fund. In that case, the addition of a new class of beneficiaries did not terminate the original trust as it was accepted that the identity of the persons entitled to benefit under the trust would be likely to change over time, as new members came into the scheme and others left. Although the case could be considered limited authority other than in respect of superannuation funds, it is useful in that it highlights the importance of context. Accordingly, Commercial Nominees could be used to support the proposition that for a variation to amount to a fundamental change the variation must effect a change not contemplated by the original deed of trust; or be so significant that there is no relationship between the original class of beneficiaries and the amended class of beneficiaries. Arguably, it might be said that in the case of a fully discretionary trust where any beneficiary has no more than an expectancy, the only change to the class of beneficiary that would effect a termination of the trust would be a  change to the final beneficiary in whom the trust property will eventually vest. Altering the vesting date will not generally result in a new trust It is common for a trustee to have a power to vary the trust period. Unless the term of a trust is an essential feature of the trust, a variation to a trust that either brings forward or extends the term of the trust will not of itself generally result in a new trust (Re Holmden’s Settlement Trusts; IR Commrs v Holmden [1968] 1 All ER 148; [1968] AC 685). When extending the term of a trust, even in situations when no new trust estate arises, it will be essential to consider the tax consequences for the parties whose interests would have vested in possession on the now varied termination date. The extension of the term could amount to a disposal of these reversionary interests. Changes in trust property are not generally a variation of trust The creation of a trust through a nominal settlement and the later addition of further property is a long standing accepted practice (Truesdale v FC of T 70 ATC 4056). For tax purposes, trustees may treat subsequent settlement on the same terms as a single settlement. Therefore, unless a trust was established for the express purpose of holding a particular asset, it is unlikely that a change of trust property would effect a fundamental variation of trust. Variations of an administrative nature will not generally give rise to a new trust It is common practice for the terms of a trust to be varied in accordance with a power of variation. Although there is no clear legal principle that can be applied, as a general proposition, where a variation effects matters of administration and there is no alteration to the beneficiaries’ rights or the terms on which the trust property is held, then the resulting variation will not give rise to a new trust. An example of a change of an administrative nature would be a variation whereby the minimum number of trustees was increased or decreased. A variation of a defined term that does not alter beneficial rights is another example of a variation of an administrative nature.  However, where a variation alters beneficial rights, for example by redefining beneficial rights to income, it is necessary to consider whether the alteration in rights has changed the essential features or substratum of the trust so that there is in fact a new trust. A change of trustee is not a variation of trust Although a change of legal ownership of trust property results, the retirement or appointment of a trustee is not of itself a variation of trust (Massereene v Commr of IR [1900] 2 IR 138 at 147). In the normal course of events following the retirement and appointment of a trustee, the trust property vests in the new trustee who assumes the rights and obligations of the retiring trustee and the trust continues. However, if the change of trustee is part of an arrangement where the trust property is to be held by a new trustee on new terms, the trustee should assess the effect of that variation on the continuity of the trust. A variation can have tax consequences even if it does not amount to a resettlement Where there is a fundamental variation of a fixed trust such that a new class of beneficiaries arises, any dispositions of property effected by the variation will likely be subject to the same tax consequences as a resettlement (Swires (HMIT) v Renton [1991] BTC 362, Re Holmden’s Settlement Trusts; IR Commrs v Holmden [1968] AC 685; [1968] 1 All ER 148, Chief Commr of Stamp Duties v Buckle (1998) 151 ALR 1). The variation need not amount to a resettlement. The tax treatment is only the same because a fundamental variation, like a resettlement, results in a disposition for tax purposes together with the requisite consequences. Law: TRU ss 64, 64A  ¶25-645 Resettlement and winding up of trusts  Resettlement occurs when all or some of the property of a trust is resettled on to a different trust The taxation consequences of a resettlement are those that arise on the transfer of property, or following a loss of continuity. The assets of a trust can be resettled, in whole or in part, on to the trustees of another trust. In addition to a formal resettlement where all or some of the property subject to a trust is transferred to another trust, a resettlement can occur where a trust is varied such that even though a formal resettlement does not occur, the consequences are that the trust property is subject to a new trust. A resettlement can occur pursuant to a power of resettlement contained in the deed of trust or pursuant to the statutory power of advancement. A resettlement at its most elemental level is merely a disposition of trust assets. Accordingly, care must be taken to recognise the attendant tax consequences. Distributions pursuant to a resettlement treated as occurring at market value Generic rules provide for the tax treatment of the transfer of property in certain situations, including resettlements. When property is resettled on to another trust no consideration is paid by the recipient trustee. However, for tax purposes the recipient trustee is treated as having acquired the property at market value. The same value is used by both the resettling and the recipient trustee. The date of the transfer for tax purposes is the date of the resettlement. See ss FC 1 and FC 2. Depreciable property distributed pursuant to a resettlement has a tax book value for the recipient trustee The deemed market value means that the resettling trustee must account for any depreciation recovery income in respect of depreciable property. This means that the resettling trustee must account for any depreciation recovery income, regardless of the fact that the transfer was not made for consideration.  Resettled land transferred at market value A resettlement of land that is subject to the land disposal provisions is treated as a disposal of the land at its market value. This may require the trustee to recognise income on the resettlement. The recipient trustee is treated as having a cost of acquisition that is the same as the trustee’s disposal value. That will provide a cost base for the recipient trustee, in the event that the recipient trustee holds the land on revenue account. Income from the sale of land distributed pursuant to a resettlement and later sold by the recipient trustee can give rise to income in the hands of the recipient trustee if the sale proceeds would have been taxable to the resettling trustee. If the land disposal provisions apply, the recipient trustee will be treated as having acquired the land on the date on which the land was first acquired by the resettling trustee. See s CB 15(2). Financial arrangements resettled at market value Where a financial arrangement is resettled, the transfer will be at market value for tax purposes. This is the case even though there will be no consideration for the resettlement. Financial arrangements include outstanding debts and fixed interest securities. The financial arrangements rules tax the economic benefit associated with financial arrangements. When a financial arrangement is transferred a wash-up calculation referred to as a base price adjustment occurs. The base price adjustment requires a calculation that compares the consideration received and paid in respect of the financial arrangement and provides that the difference is treated as income or expenditure. Outstanding debts can be novated or repaid on a resettlement If any debts are owing when a trust is resettled, the outstanding debts can be repaid or novated. A novation effects an assignment so that the debt remains but the recipient trustee accepts the liability for the debt. Debt forgiveness income can arise on resettlement  If the resettling trustee has had debts forgiven, income can arise to the resettling trustee, up to the amount of the debt forgiven, if the beneficiaries of the recipient trustee are neither persons other than those for whom the creditor has natural love and affection or registered charities (s EW 50). This would be the case if a resettlement was made from a trust where the only beneficiaries were the creditor’s children, on to a trust that had corporate beneficiaries. Where this is the case, the previously forgiven amounts are income to the trustee of the resettling trust in the income year of the resettlement (s EW 50(6)). Resettlement may result in a loss of continuity There are no modifications to the continuity provisions for companies that apply to resettlements. Accordingly, if 49% continuity is not maintained following a resettlement, any tax losses will be forfeited in companies other than loss-attributing qualifying companies. Further, if 66% continuity is not maintained in a company (other than a qualifying company) any imputation credits will be lost. However, if the company whose shares are being resettled is in a position to declare an imputed dividend, some or all of the credits may be utilised before the resettlement. Example: The majority shareholder in a company is a trust, holding 998 of 1,000 shares. The shares have been resettled on a new trust. The beneficiaries of the new trust are the same as the beneficiaries of the old trust. There is no intention of avoiding or defeating the imputation legislation by resettling the trust. Does this constitute loss of continuity for imputation credit purposes? Yes, shareholder continuity of 66% or more for imputation credits will not be satisfied. The resettlement of the shares will affect the company’s ability to carry forward any pre-existing losses and will give rise to forfeiture of the imputation credits. However, the imputation credit problem may easily be overcome by way of a taxable bonus issue or a dividend payment before resettlement.  Supply pursuant to a resettlement may be a supply for GST purposes  If the resettling trust is GST-registered, GST must be accounted for on the supply of any assets that comprise the trust’s taxable activity. Although a supply pursuant to a resettlement will not be made for consideration, if the recipient trust is associated with the resettling trustee, but not GST-registered, the supply will be deemed to be made at market value. See s 10(3) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Where both the resettling and recipient trusts are GST-registered the market value provisions will not apply. If the recipient trust is also GST-registered it may be possible to zero-rate any taxable supplies of land or that are a going concern. The fact that there will be no consideration made for a supply pursuant to a resettlement does not affect the ability to zero-rate a supply, consideration not being a requirement for zero-rating. See ¶32-035 and ¶32-505. See s 11(1)(m) and (mb) of the GST Act. If the recipient trustee is GST-registered and the resettling trustee is not, a secondhand goods credit is unlikely to be available, as the secondhand goods provision effectively requires that there be payment. Also see A McKenzie, “GST: A Practical Guide” (10th ed, CCH) at ¶1306. Tax losses will be forfeited if the resettling trust is wound up Losses cannot be resettled on to another trust. Where a resettling trust retains some assets it will retain any losses. However, if the resettling trust resettles all its property on to the recipient trust, the resettling trust will cease to exist and accordingly the tax losses will be forfeited. All of the trust assets and/or income are distributed when trust wound up There are no specific taxation provisions that apply when a trust is wound up. Accordingly, the treatment of any distribution of trust assets on a winding up is no different to that that applies on a resettlement during the life of the trust. A trust is wound up when all of the trust’s assets are distributed on to its beneficiaries or on to another trust by way of resettlement.  Although certain formalities are required to record the end of the trust, these are practically rather than legislatively prescribed when the existing trusts are extinguished. Distributions of corpus made on winding up the trust are treated as any other capital distribution and will be tax-free to the same extent as would have been the case for an earlier capital distribution. Other consequences of winding up a trust Other matters to take into account on the winding up of a trust include: ▪ Continuity. There are no exceptions to the rules regarding continuity of shareholdings that address a loss of continuity because a trust is wound up. Accordingly, a loss of continuity occurs due to a trust being wound up and the consequences are the same as for any loss of continuity. ▪ Deductions. When a trust is wound up, current year income must necessarily be paid as beneficiary income. This means that deductions cannot be offset against the income as would be the case if the income was retained as trustee income. ▪ Any losses retained on winding up will be lost. There are no provisions that allow tax losses to be distributed to the beneficiaries when a trust is wound up. ▪ If the trust is GST registered there will be a cessation of the taxable activity on or before the winding up of the trust. The relevant matters to consider are the same as for the cessation of any business.  Trustee’s liability for tax not extinguished when trust wound up The trustee will remain liable for the trust’s tax liabilities following the winding up of a trust. Once the trust’s assets are fully distributed, the trustee’s right to indemnity from the trust’s assets is practically limited. Accordingly, a prudent trustee may seek personal indemnification from the final beneficiaries for any shortfalls or liabilities in respect of any tax obligations, before making the final distribution of the trust’s assets. Where a beneficiary will not provide a satisfactory indemnity the trustee can apply to the court for directions in this matter pursuant to the Trustee Act, s 66. See for example Worn v Burton HC Auckland M 125-SD01, 17 June 2002. Law: IT07 ss CB 15, EW 50, FC 1(1)(f), FC 2(1); GST ss 10(3), 11(1)(m), (mb); TRU s 41  TRUSTEE LIABILITY ¶25-685 Trustee liability A trustee is personally liable to meet a trust’s income tax and GST obligations. Where there is more than one trustee, the trustees are treated as if they were a notional single person and they are jointly and severally liable to meet the obligations of the notional single person. With effect from 23 March 2020, the residence of the notional single person trustee when there are co-trustees has been clarified. If no election is made under s HC 33, the notional single person is a New Zealand resident when one or more of the trustees is resident in New Zealand and non-resident when none of the trustees is resident in New Zealand. Although it is common for a deed of trust to limit a trustee’s liability to the assets of the trust, such limitations of liability do not protect a trustee from third party creditors or legislative provisions that determine liability. A trustee is liable for a trust’s income tax  A trustee is personally liable for tax on trustee income. Where there are two or more trustees the liability is joint and several. This means that Inland Revenue can seek to recover a tax debt from any trustee. See Dorchester Finance Ltd v Ngahuia Ltd (2010) 3 NZTR ¶20-001. It is up to a trustee who incurs a personal liability to then seek reimbursement from the trust or any co-trustee(s). See also Selkirk v McIntyre (2013) 3 NZTR ¶23-002. The liability for income tax does not differentiate between a trustee that can also benefit from the trust as a beneficiary and an independent or professional trustee who cannot. Although a beneficiary is liable to file a tax return, the trustee is generally liable to pay the tax on beneficiary income and taxable distributions as agent of the beneficiary. The beneficiary can claim a credit for the tax paid on the beneficiary’s behalf by the trustee. When the beneficiary is a non-resident, the trustee’s liability as an agent is limited to income the beneficiary derives from New Zealand. If the trustee fails to meet a beneficiary’s tax obligations and the beneficiary is a New Zealand resident, the liability for tax falls on the beneficiary. Settlor can be liable for income tax as the trustee’s agent if there is no resident trustee A resident settlor has a residual liability for income tax if there is no resident trustee. A settlor who is liable for income tax is liable (subject to a number of exceptions) as the trustee’s agent. Where there is more than one settlor, liability is joint and several. A trustee shareholder of a qualifying company is liable for the company’s income tax A trustee shareholder of a qualifying company must elect to be personally liable for the company’s income tax. This liability for income tax is proportionate to the trustee shareholder’s shareholding. However, this rule is modified for trustee shareholders who are not beneficiaries so that liability for those shareholders is limited to the assets of the trust.  A trustee is liable for GST A trustee is personally liable for unpaid GST. As with income tax, this liability applies equally to trustees who can benefit from the trust and independent or professional trustees. See Selkirk v McIntyre (2013) 3 NZTR ¶23-002. Although this liability is limited to GST debts incurred while the person is a trustee, liability continues (regardless of whether a person has retired as a trustee) until the person notifies the Commissioner in writing that that person is no longer a trustee. See s 57 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. The director and shareholders of a corporate trustee can be liable for income tax and GST Directors and controlling shareholders are liable for a company’s GST and income tax where an arrangement is entered into in relation to a company and an effect of that arrangement is that a company cannot meet income tax and GST liabilities. For a director to be liable in these circumstances the director must have either known about the arrangement or have derived a benefit from the arrangement. Shareholders can be liable as the company’s agent. However, the liability for a shareholder is limited to the greater of the shareholder’s interest or the value derived by the shareholder. See further at ¶16-880. A common response to the issue is for a person to act as the director of a trustee company, rather than as a trustee in a personal capacity. The trustee company in question may limit the ability to have recourse to the trust’s assets and will likely have no assets of its own to settle any claim against the trustee. However, it is important to appreciate that regardless of whether a company is a trustee company, the directors of the company must still meet the requirements of the Companies Act 1993. The extent of these duties incumbent on a director mean that the unconsidered interpolation of a trustee company can leave the director of the trustee company liable to suit for failure to act in accordance with the Companies Act.  When a corporate trustee is appointed, while the company acts as a trustee and as such has all the powers and discretions of a natural person trustee, the director of the corporate trustee is responsible to the company, not the trust, when it comes to matters such as reckless trading and failure to act in the company’s best interests (see Vance v Lamb (2008) 2 NZTR ¶18-024). Such risks are more likely to arise where the corporate trustee has limited or no capital. This is because any transaction entered into by a corporate trustee must be assessed not just from the trustee’s perspective but also from the perspective of any risk that can flow to the corporate trustee in its own capacity. If a corporate trustee has a low level of capitalisation, as is often the case, the director must be vigilant to the possibility of breaching the prohibition against reckless trading, particularly if the deed of trust or the company’s constitution negates the corporate trustee’s right of indemnity from the trust’s assets. A corporate trustee with no assets on its own account can also pose a risk to other trusts that share the same trustee. These risks were highlighted again in Newmarket Trustees Ltd v C of IR (2010) 24 NZTC 24,176, where a company with multiple trustee appointments, unsuccessfully applied to set aside a statutory demand for unpaid income tax and GST on grounds that included the inconvenience and expense that would be incurred by the solvent trusts for whom the trustee also acted. The Commissioner’s subsequent application to have the company put into liquidation (C of IR v Newmarket Trustees Ltd (2011) 25 NZTC ¶20-030) was unsuccessful following the High Court’s decision to use its ultimate discretion in such matters. However, this decision was overturned on appeal and the trustee company was ultimately liquidated. See C of IR v Newmarket Trustees Ltd (2012) 25 NZTC ¶20-139 (CA). See also Black v Giltech Precision Castings (2004) Ltd (2012) 3 NZTR ¶22-021. Law: IT07 ss HA 5, HA 8, HA 28, HC 2, HC 24, HC 29, HC 32, HD 4, HD 15, YD 3BA; GST ss 57, 61  INTERNATIONAL TAX Taxing Offshore Income and Investments ¶26-010 Taxing Non-Residents in New Zealand  ¶26-400  Other International Tax Regimes  ¶26-600  TAXING OFFSHORE INCOME AND INVESTMENTS ¶26-010 Introduction to taxation of offshore income and investments A person resident in New Zealand is subject to income tax on his or her worldwide income. A person not resident in New Zealand is subject to income tax on his or her income derived from New Zealand. In both cases it is possible that an exemption may apply to relieve New Zealand taxation. The New Zealand resident taxed on worldwide income may be subject to specialist regimes for the measurement of the income from foreign sources that is subject to income tax. The resident’s investment in a controlled foreign company (CFC) and a foreign investment fund (FIF) may result in taxable income being imputed without the actual receipt of the income. There may be no taxation of CFC or FIF income if the person is a transitional resident (see ¶5700). The non-resident with income from New Zealand may be able to rely on an applicable double tax agreement to limit the imposition of New Zealand tax. For example, income from services performed in New Zealand may be relieved from income tax, and withholding as a schedular payment, in the absence of a permanent establishment maintained in New Zealand. The double tax agreements entered into  by New Zealand are based on a model agreement developed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). When considering the taxation of offshore investments or income from overseas, the issues to be considered are: ▪ the residence of the investor ▪ the residence of the investment entity ▪ the application of the “international tax rules”, being the CFC rules and the FIF rules ▪ the availability of foreign tax credits, and ▪ the effect of double tax agreements. To assist in the enforcement of New Zealand tax laws, there are numerous tax information exchange agreements with low tax jurisdictions providing for the exchange of information about taxpayers’ financial affairs. New Zealand is also a signatory to the “Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters”, a multilateral treaty providing for information exchange and tax collection assistance. Residence The concept of “residence” is central to the taxing of outbound investment and the international tax rules. There are specific residency tests for individuals (see ¶1-120) and companies (see ¶1140).  ¶26-032 Recognition of overseas income with differing tax years New Zealand residents may elect to return certain overseas income in the New Zealand tax year in which the overseas balance date falls. The same rules that apply to determine the income year to which a New Zealand balance date relates apply to the overseas balance date. When an election is made, the date on which that  foreign income is actually derived is ignored. The recognition rule is available to persons whose total overseas income does not exceed $100,000. The concession is not available for foreign-sourced income under the financial arrangements rules, or for dividends, attributed controlled foreign company (CFC) income, foreign investment fund (FIF) income or income derived from an attributing interest. Although expressly excluded, dividends derived by a non-corporate and income from financial arrangements may be returned on this basis if the Commissioner notifies the person that the election can apply. When the end of the overseas income year is a later date than the person’s New Zealand balance date, overseas income for the transitional period is ignored so that only 12 months’ overseas income is returned in the year of changeover. Example: Ms YZ’s New Zealand balance date is 31 March. She receives Australian income. Up to and including 2012, Australian income was also calculated to 31 March, ie it was apportioned for the purposes of her annual return of income. In February 2013 Ms YZ decides to change the way in which her Australian income is returned and elects to apply the option available under s EG 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. The election is notified by filing her annual return. In consequence, the Australian income for the Australian tax year ending 30 June 2012 is returned in the 2012–13 New Zealand income year.  Note that s EG 1 does not permit a taxpayer to take foreign income back to an earlier New Zealand income year. In the example above, Ms YZ could not elect to return the foreign income for the Australian year ending 30 June 2012 in the New Zealand income year ending 31 March 2012. The wording of s EG 1 clearly contemplates a prospective election. Therefore, the allocation of foreign income, which would otherwise be apportioned in the absence of an s EG 1 election and which would fall into the person’s previous income year, can only be allocated to the following income year. Law: IT07 s EG 1  ¶26-035 Currency conversion and exchange rates The general rule is that a foreign currency amount should be converted into the New Zealand dollar equivalent amount by applying the close of trading spot exchange rate on the date the foreign currency amount is to be recognised for income tax purposes. The exception is the class of case where the Commissioner or the Act permits conversion on the basis of the average of the close of trading spot exchange rates for the 15th day of each complete month that falls in the relevant period. The foreign investment fund (FIF) rules, for example, authorise use of that alternative approach. The Commissioner periodically publishes in a Tax Information Bulletin acceptable rates of conversion for converting the most common foreign currency amounts into New Zealand dollars. The publication typically shows, for an income year, mid-month and 12month average exchange rates as a Table A and month-end exchange rates as a Table B. A foreign currency converter is also maintained on the Inland Revenue’s website www.ird.govt.nz as part of the “Work it out” section. Example: Interest of US$120 is derived at a time when an acceptable conversion rate is 0.7685. The conversion into the New Zealand dollar equivalent amount is by the following calculation: US$120 ÷ 0.7685 = NZ$156.15.  Commissioner’s Approval — currency conversions for branches In September 2015, the Commissioner released an Approval, “Income tax — currency conversions for branches”. This item approves six alternative currency conversion methods and four foreign exchange rate sources for use by branches. A branch includes a foreign branch of a New Zealand entity’s business or a New Zealand branch of a foreign entity’s business. The item is  intended to help reduce compliance costs and provide taxpayers with greater certainty by confirming existing practice. In the item, the Commissioner approves the following currency conversion methods for branches (subject to certain limitations and thresholds): ▪ IFRS taxpayers may use the currency conversion method (and rates) adopted under IFRS ▪ Non-IFRS taxpayers may use: □ the average mid-month exchange rate method □ the average end-of-month exchange rate method □ the mid-month exchange rate method □ the end-of-month exchange rate method, or □ the monthly average exchange rate method. The Commissioner also approves the following alternative foreign exchange rate sources for branches (subject to certain conditions): ▪ The foreign exchange rates published on the Inland Revenue website — www.ird.govt.nz/how-to/overseas-currency/. ▪ The foreign exchange rates published on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand website — www.rbnz.govt.nz. ▪ Foreign exchange rates from one of New Zealand’s registered banks. ▪ Any reputable externally-sourced exchange rate that is appropriate given the nature of the branch’s business. Commissioner’s Approval – foreign residential rental property amounts In July 2020, Inland Revenue released an Approval for conversion methods and exchange rate sources for foreign residential rental property amounts: FX 20/01 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7,  August 2020 at 28). The Approval applies only to individuals who are New Zealand residents or non-resident trustees of certain trusts (ie a trust with a resident settlor, a superannuation fund, or a testamentary or inter vivos trust with a resident trustee and a settlor who died resident in New Zealand) who own foreign residential rental property. For these purposes, an individual includes: ▪ an individual partner of a partnership that has an interest in a foreign rental property as a partner, and ▪ an individual acting in their capacity as trustee. The Approval provides for the annual and monthly currency conversion methods for converting foreign currency amounts related to foreign residential rental properties to New Zealand dollars (subject to certain conditions and limitations). The Approval also approves the following exchange rate sources (subject to certain conditions): ▪ the foreign exchange rates published on the Inland Revenue website, and ▪ the foreign exchange rates from another reputable source (eg exchange rates published on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand website or rates obtained from a registered bank). Note that the Approval was released as one of three items that were jointly prepared and released by Inland Revenue to address a range of tax issues a New Zealand tax resident individual may face if they own foreign residential rental property. See also: ▪ IS 20/06, “Income tax – Tax issues arising from ownership of foreign residential rental property”, and ▪ IS 20/07, “Income tax – Application of the financial arrangements rules to foreign currency loans used to finance foreign residential rental property”, at ¶5-232, ¶6-213 and ¶26-250. Law: IT07 s YF 1  Controlled foreign companies (CFCs) ¶26-038 Introduction to controlled foreign company (CFC) rules The controlled foreign company (CFC) rules may impute income in the hands of a New Zealand resident investor even though the person has not actually derived the income. This occurs if the person has an ownership interest above prescribed levels in a non-resident company earning passive income in the form of interest, certain dividends, royalties and rents. The CFC rules are supported by the thin capitalisation rules, which may prevent interest deductibility in New Zealand if the funding assists with the generation of active income that is not tax under the CFC rules. See ¶26-620 for commentary on the thin capitalisation rules. If the ownership interest in the non-resident company does not exceed the prescribed thresholds, the investment may be subject to taxation under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules. The foreign investments of a portfolio investment entity (PIE) are always subject to taxation under the FIF rules. See further at ¶26-110. CFC taxation The main ingredients for the taxation of income under the CFC rules may be summarised diagrammatically as follows: foreign company ↓ is a CFC if control interests: ▪ exceed 50% held between five or fewer New Zealand residents, or ▪ of 40% or more are held by a New Zealand resident ↓  CFC rules are not engaged if the CFC is: ▪ a non-attributing active CFC, or ▪ a non-attributing Australian CFC without personal services income ↓ the foreign company is a foreign PIE equivalent with a resident PIE or life insurer shareholder ↓ non-attributing active CFC status is achieved if passive income (dividends, interest, royalties, rents) is less than 5% of total income ↓ passive income is ascertained, on the basis of: ▪ approved financial accounts, or ▪ tax principles ↓ choosing status as an elective attributing CFC excludes nonattributing active CFC classification ↓ attribution is required for an income interest of 10% or more if the CFC is not a non-attributing active CFC ↓ attributable CFC income or loss determined if passive income is 5% or more of total income with an adjustment if the CFC is excessively debt funded ↓ non-attributing Australian CFC status is achieved under  residence and full taxation in Australia ↓ attributed CFC income or loss is commensurate with the shareholder’s income interest ↓ thin capitalisation rules may reduce interest deductibility if the New Zealand business is excessively geared.  ¶26-042 Attributed CFC income and attributed CFC loss Attributed CFC income Income of a person includes attributed controlled foreign company (CFC) income. A person (other than a portfolio investment entity) has attributed CFC income from a CFC if: ▪ the income interest of the person in the CFC is 10% or more ▪ the CFC has net attributable CFC income or the CFC gets a distribution from a non-complying trust ▪ the CFC is not a non-attributing active CFC, there being no election to override that status by adoption of elective attributing CFC status, and ▪ the CFC is not a non-attributing Australian CFC. There is a qualification to the effect that there is attributed CFC income for a CFC’s personal services income even though the CFC may be a non-attributing active CFC or a non-attributing Australian CFC. A shareholder with an income interest of at least 10% in a CFC deriving personal services income always has attributed CFC income. A person also has attributed CFC income if the person has an attributing interest in a foreign investment fund (FIF), the person is using the attributable FIF income method to calculate FIF income,  and the FIF receives a taxable distribution from a non-complying trust. Attributed CFC loss A person is allowed a deduction for an attributed CFC loss, subject to the jurisdictional ring-fencing rule in s DN 4 (which matches the deduction to income from the same jurisdiction and common status of an elective attributing CFC). A person (other than a portfolio investment entity) has an attributed CFC loss if: ▪ the person’s income interest in the CFC is 10% or more ▪ the CFC has a net attributable CFC loss, and ▪ the CFC is neither a non-attributing active CFC nor a nonattributing Australian CFC (unless the CFC is one of those kinds of CFC and earns personal services income). The attributed CFC income or the attributed CFC loss arises if the CFC has the income or loss for its accounting period that ends during an income year. No attributed CFC income or attributed CFC loss arises if the person is a transitional resident. The attributed CFC loss not allowed as a deduction because of the jurisdictional ring-fencing restriction becomes a tax loss component that may be carried forward and used in later income years, subject to the general shareholder continuity requirements. Alternatively, the excess may be offset against current or future net income of another group member, again subject to jurisdictional ring-fencing. The tenor of the CFC rules is to create attributed CFC income or attributed CFC loss for passive income of the CFC commensurate with the investor’s income interest in the CFC. No attributed CFC income or loss arises if the CFC conducts an active business, or if passive income of the CFC is less than 5% of total income. In addition, there is generally no attributed CFC income or loss for the passive income of a CFC resident in Australia. Exemption as a nonattributing active CFC may be overridden if the shareholder chooses elective attributing CFC status for the CFC.  Disclosure A person with an income interest in a CFC of 10% or more must make electronic disclosure of the interest (s 61 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA)). A default assessment of attributed CFC income or loss is authorised by s EX 72 where there is failure to disclose. The Commissioner is authorised to grant exemptions from disclosure. Under s 61(2) of the TAA, the Commissioner has issued an international tax disclosure exemption that applies for the income year ended 31 March 2020 entitled “2020 International Tax Disclosure Exemption ITR31”, which can be found on the Inland Revenue website and in CCH, New Zealand Income Tax Legislation. Failure to make disclosure or the making of any false disclosure is an offence under Pt 9 of the TAA. See ¶14-250. Impact of COVID-19 virus on disclosure requirement Inland Revenue acknowledged that the COVID-19 pandemic might have impacted taxpayers’ ability to access the financial information required to complete the necessary disclosures and tax returns on time. Inland Revenue stated that if taxpayers were unable to complete their CFC disclosure on time and the delay was attributable to the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak, no compliance action would be taken, or penalties imposed, provided the CFC disclosure was filed by 31 May 2020. To be eligible for this relief, the relevant income tax return had to be filed. Law: IT07 ss CQ 1, CQ 2, DN 1, DN 2, EX 72, EX 73, IQ 2, IQ 2B, IQ 4; TAA s 61  ¶26-050 Controlled foreign companies and control interests A foreign company is a controlled foreign company (CFC) if control interests in the CFC exceed certain thresholds. If the company is a CFC, shareholders may have attributed CFC income or loss  commensurate with income interests in the CFC. The topic of income interests is referred to further at ¶26-060. When a foreign company is a CFC A foreign company may be a CFC. A foreign company is a company that is not resident in New Zealand or is treated under a double tax agreement as not being resident in New Zealand. The notion of a company includes not only a body corporate but also a unit trust. See ¶16-010. An Australian limited partnership, although treated as a company under Australian tax law, is not a foreign company for New Zealand tax purposes. A foreign company is classified as a CFC if at any time during an accounting period of the company: ▪ there is a group of five or fewer New Zealand residents whose control interests in a company are over 50% in any one control interest category ▪ a single New Zealand resident holds a control interest in the company of 40% or more unless, at that time, a person who is neither a New Zealand resident nor associated with the resident has a control interest of the same category that at least equals that of the New Zealand resident, or ▪ a group of five or fewer New Zealand residents has the power to control the exercise of shareholder decision-making rights for the company and, as a result, to control the company’s affairs. If the foreign company would have been a CFC at any time in its accounting period, the company is treated as a CFC for the whole of the accounting period. For the purpose of the international tax rules, when a resident company becomes a foreign company and then reverts to being a resident company again within a span of 183 days, it is treated as having been a New Zealand resident company for the whole period. Control interests  Control interests are calculated by aggregating the direct and indirect control interests held by a person and by persons associated with that person. There are four separate categories of rights in which a direct control interest in a foreign company can arise. These are shareholding in the foreign company, shareholder decision-making rights, entitlement to income and entitlement to net assets on distribution. It may be expected that in most cases the first category relating to shares in the foreign company will be the only relevant category of direct control interest. However, where more than one category exists for a company, then direct control interests in each category must be ascertained. The direct control interest in each control interest category is the percentage of the total that the person holds. Note that when calculating the shareholder decision-making rights category, if the percentage varies between the different decision-making rights, the highest percentage is taken. An indirect control interests arises where a person holds an interest in a CFC, which in turn holds a direct control interest in another foreign company. The CFC’s direct control interest in the lower-tier foreign company is attributed to the person as an indirect control interest. An indirect control interest also includes a direct control interest held by an associated person of the first CFC in the underlying foreign company. When two or more New Zealand residents enter into an arrangement whereby any control interests in a foreign company are held by other persons so as to prevent that company from being a CFC, those control interests are deemed to be held by the New Zealand residents in equal shares. Control interests are measured on the last day of each calendar quarter. The control interest determined at that date is treated as having been held for the whole of the quarter. Alternatively, the investor may make an irrevocable election for control interests to be ascertained on a daily basis. The election would not be effective if the Commissioner considers that interests have been transferred  between associates for the purpose of defeating the CFC or FIF rules. A New Zealand resident is treated as associated with a non-resident relative only if the New Zealand resident holds a direct control interest or indirect control interest in the CFC. Exception A foreign company will not be a CFC if the foreign company is a “foreign PIE equivalent” and one of the New Zealand residents is: ▪ a portfolio investment entity (PIE) ▪ an entity eligible to be a PIE, or ▪ a life insurance company. See further at ¶29-111 and ¶29-112. Law: IT07 ss EX 1, EX 2–EX 7, EX 26, GB 7, YD 2(2)  ¶26-060 Income interests in a CFC An income interest determines the net income or loss that is attributed to a person under the controlled foreign company (CFC) rules. The income interest of a person in a CFC is defined as the aggregate of all direct and indirect income interests held in that company. Income interests are ultimately used to ascertain the foreign company income to be attributed to a New Zealand resident person. Calculation of these interests is based on the same four categories of rights held in foreign companies as are used to calculate control interests (see ¶26-050). Direct income interest in company The direct income interest of each category of right is the percentage of the total that the person holds in the company at that time. Where the percentage varies between the different categories, the person’s direct income interest in the CFC is the highest.  A person with an income interest of less than 10% (when aggregated with the income interests of any associated persons) in a CFC is not subject to the CFC rules on that person’s own interest. Instead that person may be subject to the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules. See ¶26-110. Indirect income interest An indirect income interest arises when a person holds a direct income interest in a CFC that, in turn, holds a direct income interest in another CFC. The indirect income interests of any person are computed by multiplying the person’s direct income interest in the first CFC by that CFC’s direct income interest in the second CFC, and so on. Income interests are generally determined on the last day of each calendar quarter with the interest thus ascertained attributed for the whole of the quarter. Alternatively, the investor may make an irrevocable election to enable income interests to be measured on a daily basis. The Commissioner is authorised to disregard the election if it was made for the purposes of defeating the CFC or FIF rules. The circumstances giving rise to an income interest are more circumscribed than that for a control interest. This is because a person who is entitled to acquire a control interest in a foreign company does not always acquire an equivalent income interest. When a person’s income interest in a CFC varies during any accounting period, the income interest of the person is calculated in relation to each period within that accounting period during which the income interest remained unchanged. The amounts are aggregated to give the income interest of the person throughout the relevant accounting period of the CFC. Law: IT07 ss EX 8–EX 11, EX 14–EX 17, EX 26  ¶26-062 Attributed CFC income or loss — exclusions A person with an income interest in a controlled foreign company (CFC) of at least 10% has attributed CFC income or an attributed CFC loss, which is found by multiplying the net attributable CFC  income or loss of the CFC for an accounting period by the person’s income interest. Added to the attributed CFC income is the share based on the person’s income interest of any taxable distribution received by the CFC from a non-complying trust. An attributed CFC loss is reduced if the person does not suffer a corresponding economic loss, whether because of a call option, a put option or any other reason. No attributed CFC income or attributed CFC loss arises if the CFC is: ▪ a non-attributing active CFC, the CFC not being an elective attributing CFC instead, or ▪ a non-attributing Australian CFC and the CFC does not earn personal services income. Non-attributing active CFC A non-attributing active CFC is a CFC whose passive income (ie its attributable income) is less than 5% of gross income for the CFC’s accounting period. This exclusion is commonly referred to as “the active business test” or “active income exemption”. The test for the existence of a non-attributing active CFC is applied under s EX 21B using either: ▪ the tax-based default test in s EX 21D, involving the determination of gross income and passive income using income tax principles, or ▪ the optional accounting-based test in s EX 21E if that test is available to the company, involving the use of approved financial accounts as identified in s EX 21C. Accounting-based test The accounting-based approach may be adopted only if one of the accounting standards permitted under s EX 21C is used and the accounts of the CFC have been audited by an independent auditor  who has given an unqualified opinion on the accounts. The relevant accounting standards prescribed by s EX 21C are: ▪ generally accepted accounting practice (GAAP) with IFRS ▪ IFRSEs, and ▪ GAAP without IFRS for persons not required to use IFRS. In testing whether non-attributing active CFC status applies, CFCs in the same jurisdiction may be consolidated, effectively treating the group as a single CFC. This is provided that the applicable accounting standard requires all the accounts to be consolidated together, the CFCs share the same functional currency and the taxpayer (or companies in the same wholly-owned group of companies) holds an income interest of more than 50% in each CFC. All CFCs in the group are non-attributing active CFCs if that is the outcome of the tests applied to the group as a whole. An adjustment must be made to exclude all amounts referable to a minority interest if the CFC is not wholly-owned by the taxpayer. The functional currency as prescribed by the applicable accounting standard is to be adopted when determining status as a nonattributing active CFC. This also applies if CFCs are consolidated for the purposes of the test. When the determination is made on the basis of consolidated accounts that include the accounts of the CFC, all amounts expressed in the functional currency of the CFC must be converted to the presentation currency of the consolidated accounts by use of an average exchange rate for the accounting period and not by following the method prescribed by the governing accounting standard. In broad terms, the test in s EX 21E is a fraction comparing passive income with reported income. A non-attributing active CFC is a CFC whose ratio of attributable income to total income is less than 5% where total income is greater than zero. Attributable income is the numerator and total income is the denominator under the formula expressed as:  (reported passive + added passive − removed passive) ÷ (reported revenue + added revenue − removed revenue) where: reported passive: is income from dividends, royalties, rent, leases, interest, a gain/loss from a financial asset or a derivative instrument, a foreign exchange gain/loss from a financial asset or financial liability and insurance profits together with supporting investment income added passive: is the total of amounts not included in reported passive that are life insurance policy proceeds, revenue account property disposal income, New Zealand personal services income, telecommunication services income and attributed PIE income that is not excluded income removed passive: is zero if the interest holder chooses or the total of certain dividends, royalties, rents, gains/losses from a financial asset or financial liability and revenue account property income not included in the attributable CFC amount that have already been included in reported or added passive reported revenue: is revenue included under the applicable accounting standard, income from rent and leases, the gain/loss from financial assets and derivative instruments, a foreign exchange gain/loss from a financial asset or financial liability and insurance profits added revenue: is zero if the interest holder chooses or the total of amounts that are not reported revenue and are life insurance policy proceeds or certain revenue account property disposal income, and removed revenue: is the total of amounts already included in reported or added revenue that fall within certain categories of revenue account property costs, dividends, personal services income that is attributed CFC income, gain/loss from shares that are not revenue account property, income derived from a fixed  establishment that is not an attributable CFC amount, income from another CFC that could be part of a CFC test group, income from the reduction of a provision and income from an asset that is neither revenue account property nor a financial asset. One feature of the formula is to eliminate double-counting and ensure the double-elimination of particular items. The calculation endeavours to specify that attributable income is a reasonable approximation to the attributable income that would be calculated under taxation principles without requiring excessive adjustments to items in the financial accounts. Where the formula gives a negative numerator, it is treated as being zero. Originally, this was not the case and a negative numerator disqualified a CFC from passing the active business test. Thus, a CFC that was demonstrably an active CFC, in that they received very little, if any, passive income, might fail the accounting-based test if it held foreign currency and that currency lost value, resulting in a foreign exchange loss. Requiring those CFCs to undertake the more demanding default test was considered to be an undue compliance burden and the legislation was amended with retrospective effect. The tests for non-attributing active CFC status are supported by avoidance provisions addressing supplies for the purpose of increasing the tax measure of total income (s GB 15B) and arrangements having the purpose of achieving CFC status under the accounting measure of income (s GB 15C). See further at ¶33-144. An amendment made in 2018 but applying retrospectively from 1 July 2009, allows a person, or a member of their group, who only holds an income interest in a CFC for part of an accounting period to use accounts that cover that part-period to calculate whether the CFC passes the active business test under the accounting standards test. This addresses the concern that a person who only owns an income interest in a CFC for part of an accounting period may not have access to the CFC’s prepared accounts for the full accounting  period and must therefore use the default test to determine whether the CFC passes the active business test. Tax-based default test The tax-based test set out in s EX 21D requires ascertaining the attributed CFC amount of the CFC (see below). Essentially, if passive income of a CFC calculated under income tax principles is less than 5% for the relevant accounting period, the CFC is a nonattributing active CFC. The formula for this test is: (attributable − attributable adjustments) ÷ (gross − gross adjustments) where: attributable: is the attributable CFC amount (ie the passive income) for the period attributable adjustments: is the total of amounts included within attributable that the interest holder may choose to treat as attributable adjustments being certain income derived from the supply of personal services and the cost of certain revenue account property gross: is the annual gross income for the accounting period, excluding attributed income from foreign equity, and gross adjustments: is the total of the attributable adjustments, expenditure or loss used when calculating the attributable CFC amount, income derived from a fixed establishment that is not an attributable CFC amount, and income derived from a company in the same jurisdiction that uses the same currency and in which the interest holder has an interest of 50% or more. When making the determination, CFCs resident in the same jurisdiction may be consolidated if the taxpayer (or companies in the same wholly-owned group of companies) holds income interests exceeding 50% in the CFCs. Uniform accounting policies for like transactions must have been adopted throughout the group and  intra-group transactions and balances must be eliminated. An adjustment must also be made to exclude income that is attributable to any minority interest in the CFC. The determination of nonattributing active CFC status is undertaken in the functional currency of the CFC and, once selected, the functional currency may be changed only upon notification to the Commissioner. Companies that are part of wholly-owned groups may form test groups that include any interest in a CFC held by a member of the wholly-owned group. The same-jurisdiction rule continues to apply. Wholly-owned groups of companies are not able to form overlapping test groups by including any one CFC in multiple different test groups. In addition, a CFC that has an offshore branch is able to be a member of a test group subject to certain safeguards. An anti-avoidance rule prevents taxpayers from using the test grouping rules to gain an unintended tax advantage. Section GB 15BA provides that the Commissioner may treat an election to include or not to include a particular CFC in a test group as reversed if the person has entered into an arrangement to reduce the amount of net attributable CFC income or increase the amount of net attributable CFC losses. The rule applies from 1 April 2016 for the 2016–17 and later income years. In addition, taxpayers who acquire or dispose of groups of foreign companies during the year may access the test grouping concession in that year for those companies. Insurers An insurer that is registered and rated can apply to the Commissioner for a determination that a CFC is a non-attributing active CFC. To receive a favourable determination the main business of the CFC must relate to insurance, determined on the basis of whether most of the income of the CFC is generated from insurance premiums and proceeds from investment assets having a value commensurate with the insurance contracts of the business. Before 1 April 2017, the CFC’s insurance business had to have been in existence before 30 June 2009. To allow overseas businesses  acquired after 30 June 2009 to qualify for a determination, this requirement was removed from 1 April 2017. Non-attributing Australian CFC A non-attributing Australian CFC is a CFC resident in Australia and subject to income tax in Australia without the benefit of any exemption for business profits derived from outside Australia or for offshore banking units. The CFC must also be treated as resident in Australia by all Australian double tax agreements. A non-attributing Australian CFC does not generate attributed CFC income or loss, although that feature does not preclude the possibility of the investment yielding FIF income or loss. The exception is if the Australian CFC derives personal services income, which is always attributable under the CFC rules. Only those Australian Unit Trusts that are taxed as companies under Australian law or whose units are owned by an Australian resident entity and taxed as a company or treated as part of the head company of a consolidated group are included within the exemption for non-attributing Australian CFCs. Elective attributing CFC Elective attributing CFC status may be chosen by a shareholder who has an income interest of 10% or more in the relevant CFC. The election is available for a CFC that would otherwise be a nonattributing active CFC but may not be made for a non-attributing Australian CFC or a CFC in the business of banking or insurance. Attributable CFC income follows on from the election so that the election may be worthwhile only where to do so leads to a comparatively favourable outcome such as the ability to deduct a greater range of expenditure for the current or a future period. Elective attributing CFC status is generally effective as from the start of the income year following the year in which the election was made. The Commissioner has a discretion to accept a retrospective election. The election may be revoked if the Commissioner accepts the revocation because it is extremely unlikely that there will be future  attributable CFC income and there is no purpose or effect to reduce a tax liability. The election expires automatically if the income interest in the CFC reduces below 10%. Attributable CFC amount The attributable CFC amount determined under s EX 20B enables calculation of the passive income of a CFC for a taxpayer who adopts the tax-based test for ascertaining possible classification as a non-attributing active CFC. In addition, if the attributable CFC amount results in a failure to achieve non-attributing active CFC classification, the attributable CFC amount becomes attributable CFC income or loss. The attributable CFC amount is calculated under the formula in s EX 20B using the rules set out in s EX 21, which make appropriate modifications to the general principles of the Act for ascertaining taxable income. The attributable CFC amount for an accounting period of the CFC includes the following categories of income: ▪ dividends from a portfolio direct income interest in a foreign company not resident in Australia and excluded from the FIF rules ▪ dividends from a New Zealand company to the extent they are not fully imputed ▪ deductible foreign equity distributions or distributions for fixedrate foreign equity that is not a distribution from an associated non-attributing active CFC ▪ royalties, with certain exceptions (in broad terms, third party active royalties, related party active royalties, same jurisdiction active royalties and royalties from property owned by a New Zealand resident) ▪ rent, with certain limited exceptions  ▪ income from an insurance business or from being an insurer (in the absence of an exclusion under a determination) ▪ income from a life insurance policy with the exception of a policy subject to the FIF rules ▪ personal services income generated from services provided by an associate who is a New Zealand resident and that are not essential services for products of the CFC provided certain thresholds are met ▪ income from share dealing and share options on revenue account with the exception of shares generating FIF income in the period of disposal under the fair dividend rate method, the cost method, the comparative value method or the deemed rate of return method ▪ income from the disposal of certain other revenue account property ▪ income from services physically performed in New Zealand ▪ income from the CFC’s telecommunication assets located outside a country and telecommunication services physically performed in New Zealand (unless the CFC is a network operator) ▪ attributed PIE income that is not excluded income ▪ dividends from a direct income interest of 10% or more in an Australian company that is not an attributing interest under the FIF rules ▪ income from a financial arrangement or short-term agreement for sale and purchase that the CFC has elected to treat as a financial arrangement that is not a derivative instrument, a loan to an associated non-attributing active CFC, or an agreement for the sale or purchase of property or services or a hire purchase  agreement entered in the ordinary course of business by the CFC or for property or services produced or used by the CFC in business, and ▪ income from derivative instruments held by the CFC for the purpose of dealing, or which are entered outside the ordinary course of its business, and derivative instruments to the extent that the income is from a hedging instrument for attributable income of the CFC or for a transaction producing attributable income. The amount of apportioned funding income is deducted from the above income. Apportioned funding income takes account of amounts already included that relate to a financial arrangement that provides funds for the CFC and for which there is no reasonable expectation that the CFC will derive more income than deductions from the financial arrangement. This captures income such as unexpected exchange gains from loans raised by the CFC with the removal of any effects if there is on-lending to an associated CFC together with a deduction to the extent that the loan finances active assets. If the CFC carries on the business of banking or insurance, or is controlled by an entity carrying on such a business, the apportioned funding income of the CFC will be zero. Net attributable CFC income or loss Net attributable CFC income or loss is calculated in accordance with s EX 20C. From the attributable CFC income the following are deducted: ▪ apportioned funding costs: expenditure incurred under financial arrangements that provide funds to the CFC and distributions on fixed-rate foreign equity and deductible foreign equity to a New Zealand resident company, and ▪ other deductions: other outgoings incurred to derive an attributable CFC amount.  The rules mirror the effect of the prepayment rules in s EA 3, so that taxpayers are not able to make a full claim in the year payment is made for expenses that relate to goods or services that will be used over more than one year. Apportioned funding costs are reduced if the CFC is excessively debt-funded. Excessive debt funding for the CFC exists where the CFC’s debt:asset ratio is more than 0.75 and the CFC’s relative debt:asset ratio exceeds 1.10, as calculated pursuant to ss EX 20D and EX 20E. The Commissioner is authorised to make an assessment of attributed CFC income or loss in the absence of sufficient information held by the New Zealand investor or disclosure of the income interest in the CFC: s EX 72. Law: IT07 ss EX 18A–EX 22, EX 72, EX 73, GB 15B, GB 15C; TAA s 91AAQ  ¶26-085 Foreign tax credits against attributed CFC income A person with attributed CFC income is allowed a tax credit for tax paid or payable in relation to the income. The tax credit extends to withholding taxes and tax paid in New Zealand. The amount of the person’s tax credit is that proportion of the tax paid that is commensurate with the income interest held in the CFC. The tax credit must be reduced or repaid if the tax paid is refunded. Foreign tax paid must be converted into the New Zealand dollar equivalent amount by use of the close of trading spot exchange rate on the day the tax is paid or becomes payable or by the average of close of trading spot exchange rates for the 15th day of each complete month in the period giving rise to the attributed CFC income. An unused tax credit may be carried forward for use as a credit against income tax on future attributed CFC income from the same jurisdiction, subject to the same shareholder continuity requirement applicable to a company carrying forward a tax loss component. The  benefit of the tax credit may also be passed to another group company with attributed CFC income from the same jurisdiction. A foreign tax credit is available for foreign income tax paid in relation to a CFC from which attributable income is derived when the foreign income tax has been paid by the taxpayer’s parent or a member of the taxpayer’s group. Law: IT07 ss LK 1–LK 6  Foreign investment funds (FIFs) ¶26-110 Introduction to foreign investment fund (FIF) rules Investment in a foreign investment fund (FIF) may result in income being imputed despite the absence of any receipt from the investment, such as dividends. Categories of FIF interests The main category of FIF interest comprises shares in a foreign company, although similarly classified is an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme, foreign life insurance policy and an entity listed in sch 25 pt A (currently no entities are listed). From 1 April 2014, in general, an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme is no longer an attributing interest subject to the FIF rules. Taxation applies to distributions when received. See ¶5-317. However, an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme is still subject to the FIF rules where either the person had applied the FIF rules to the interest in a return filed before 20 May 2013 and continues to apply those rules, or the interest was acquired when the person was resident in New Zealand. Such interests are referred to as “FIF superannuation interests” from 1 April 2014. See ¶26-125. An exemption may apply to exclude taxation of FIF income under the FIF rules. There are exemptions for the FIF interests of a natural person with a cost not exceeding $50,000, shares in an ASX-listed company and certain Australian unit trusts and superannuation  funds. Income interests of 10% or more in a controlled foreign company (CFC), and a direct income interest of 10% or more in an Australian company, are also excluded from taxation under the FIF rules. See ¶26-125. Upon the application of an exemption general tax rules apply so that income includes any dividends derived and gains from disposal of FIF interests held on revenue account. Calculation methods One of five prescribed calculation methods is applied to ascertain FIF income or loss for the income year, with restrictions constraining the calculation method that may be adopted. The calculation methods are: ▪ the fair dividend rate method: 5% of the market value of the FIF interest at the start of the income year is FIF income, with this method to be adopted unless it is not practical to do so, the investment is a non-ordinary share or another available calculation method is chosen ▪ the comparative value method: the year’s total return (dividends and capital appreciation) is FIF income, with this method able to be chosen by natural person and family trust investors and mandatory for a non-ordinary share ▪ the cost method: 5% of the cost of the FIF interest (uplifted by 5% per annum) is FIF income ▪ the deemed rate of return: a prescribed rate of return is FIF income, with this method to be adopted for a non-ordinary share whose market value cannot be ascertained ▪ the attributable FIF income method: passive income is FIF income, with this method available only if the FIF interest is at least 10% and not a non-attributing active FIF (unless taxation under the FIF rules is chosen).  Taxation under the FIF rules is generally the only taxation applied to the investment. Dividends and gains on disposal are not separately taxed. See ¶26-130. Disclosure Disclosure to the Commissioner of a FIF interest may be required under s 61 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The Commissioner is authorised to grant exemptions from disclosure. Under s 61(2) of the TAA, the Commissioner has issued an international tax disclosure exemption that applies for the income year ended 31 March 2020 entitled “2020 International Tax Disclosure Exemption ITR31”, which can be found on the Inland Revenue website and in CCH, New Zealand Income Tax Legislation. Failure to make disclosure or the making of any false disclosure is an offence under Pt 9 of the TAA. See ¶14-250. Failure to disclose may also result in a default assessment under s EX 72. Impact of COVID-19 virus on disclosure requirement Inland Revenue acknowledged that the COVID-19 pandemic might have impacted taxpayers’ ability to access the financial information required to complete the necessary disclosures and tax returns on time. Inland Revenue stated that if taxpayers were unable to complete their FIF disclosure on time and the delay was attributable to the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak, no compliance action would be taken, or penalties imposed, provided the FIF disclosure was filed by 31 May 2020. To be eligible for this relief, the relevant income tax return had to be filed. Law: IT07 ss CQ 4, CQ 5, EX 72; TAA s 61  ¶26-125 Exemptions from FIF rules An exemption may apply to exclude an investment from taxation under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules. Following application of the exemption general tax rules apply so that income includes any dividends derived from the FIF and gains from the disposal of a FIF interest held on revenue account.  Natural person $50,000 threshold A natural person is exempt from the FIF rules if the total cost of all FIF interests is not more than $50,000. The threshold is applied to FIF interests so that, for example, exempt ASX-listed shareholdings (see below) are not taken into account in application of the threshold. There may be a year’s grace to start of application of the FIF rules if the $50,000 threshold is exceeded by purchases after the start of the income year (because there would be insufficient FIF interests at the start of the income year for the purposes of the fair dividend rate method and the cost method). If the threshold is exceeded the FIF rules apply to all FIFs and not just the excess over the threshold. The exemption can be disregarded by the taxpayer filing a tax return on the basis that the FIF rules apply (despite attributing FIF interests costing $50,000 or less). Once voluntary application is chosen the FIF rules must continue to be applied unless for each of the previous four income years the $50,000 exemption would have otherwise applied. Example: Jane has less than $50,000 of attributed interests in FIFs in 2012 but chooses to include FIF income in her 2012 tax return. She sells all her attributing interests in FIFs in 2012 and holds no attributing interests in FIFs in each of the four years 2013–2016. In 2017 she purchases some attributing interests in FIFs. These new FIF interests have a cost of less than $50,000. Because Jane had no attributing interests in FIFs for each of the previous four years, she can choose whether or not to include the FIF income in her 2017 tax return. If she does not apply the FIF rules, Jane will instead be taxed on any foreign dividends or disposal of foreign shares that are held on revenue account (consistent with the way New Zealand shares are taxed). Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 6, July 2012 at 19.  Exemption for shares in ASX-listed Australian companies There is an exemption from the FIF rules for shares (other than stapled stock) held in an Australian company. The exclusion applies where that company is, at all times in the income year when the person holds a right in the company:  ▪ resident in Australia (and not treated under a double tax agreement (or its equivalent) as being resident in a country other than Australia) ▪ not specified in sch 25 pt B (currently there are no entities specified in this Schedule), and ▪ required to maintain an Australian franking account. In addition, the company must have its shares listed on the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) at the beginning of the income year, or when the shares are acquired (if acquired after the start of the tax year) or at the beginning of the last month of the prior year if a scheme of arrangement applies to the shares. Australian unit trust exemption There is an exemption for interests held in certain Australian unit trusts. To qualify for this exemption, the unit trust must meet a 25% minimum turnover requirement or satisfy a 70% minimum distribution test, and the investors must elect to use the resident withholding tax proxy mechanism for their investment in the entity. Australian superannuation fund exemption An exemption from the FIF rules exists for an interest in an Australian superannuation scheme that meets certain criteria. Generally, to fall within the exemption, the scheme has to be subject to strict preservation rules whereby the benefits are locked in until the member reaches retirement age. This exemption is expected to be wide enough to include those schemes that received compulsory employment superannuation contributions under Australia’s guarantee scheme. Controlled foreign company (CFC) rules exemption An attributing interest in a FIF does not include an income interest of 10% or more in a CFC. See ¶26-042. Australian resident FIF of 10% or more  There is an exemption for an attributing interest of 10% or more in a FIF resident and subject to tax in Australia where the taxpayer is not a PIE, superannuation scheme, unit trust, life insurer or group investment fund. In addition, the FIF must not be subject to an exemption for offshore business income or a special allowance, relief or exemption for offshore banking units. Australian Unit Trusts that are not taxed as companies under Australian law are excluded from the exemption for interests in FIFs resident in Australia. Note that the test only applies to the period of the year that the taxpayer holds an interest in the FIF to ensure a taxpayer does not fall outside the exemption because they have an interest of 10% or more for only part of the year. Direct investment in grey list companies exemption The following interests in a FIF are exempt from the FIF rules: ▪ Shares in a grey list company that has migrated out of New Zealand but that has retained a significant presence in New Zealand through a fixed establishment (by incurring at least $1m, or 25%, of its expenditure (other than interest) in New Zealand and engaging 10 or more full-time employees or at least 25% of the total number of employees of the company). To be eligible for the exemption the investor must have held shares at all times in the company since it was an unlisted New Zealand company. This exemption is available for 10 years from the date the unlisted company left New Zealand and became a grey list company. ▪ Shares in a grey list company that has taken over a New Zealand company and that New Zealand company continues to have significant presence in New Zealand. To be eligible for the exemption, the investor must have acquired the shares when the company was unlisted. This exemption is available for 10 years from the date the grey list company acquired more than 50% of the New Zealand company.  ▪ Shares (or an option to buy shares) in a grey list company first acquired by a person under a venture investment agreement at the same time and on the same terms as when the Venture Investment Fund acquired shares in the FIF. ▪ Shares in a grey list company held by a natural person under an employee share scheme where there are restrictions on the ability of the investor to sell the shares. The exemption only applies if at the beginning of the year the restriction period has not expired or has been expired for less than 6 months. ▪ From 29 September 2018, shares acquired under an employee share scheme where, at the beginning of the year, the share scheme taxing date has not passed. Foreign exchange control exemption There is an exemption from the FIF rules for an interest held by a natural person in a foreign entity located in a country where exchange controls prevent the person from deriving any income in New Zealand currency or realising the investment for New Zealand currency (or a currency that can be easily converted to New Zealand currency). This exemption is available where the interest was acquired: ▪ before the holder first became a New Zealand resident ▪ before the exchange controls were imposed by the country in which the foreign entity is located, or ▪ before 2 July 1992. Foreign superannuation schemes or life insurance policies Section EX 42B provides that a person’s right to benefit from a foreign superannuation scheme as a beneficiary or a member is not an attributing interest in the scheme if the right is not a FIF superannuation interest for the person. Thus, in most cases, an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme is not subject to the FIF  rules, provided that interest was acquired when the person was nonresident. A “FIF superannuation interest” is an interest in a foreign superannuation scheme as a beneficiary or a member where either the person has applied the FIF rules to the interest in a return filed before 20 May 2013 and continues to apply those rules, or the interest was acquired when the person was resident in New Zealand. FIF superannuation interests remain subject to the FIF rules. Section EX 41 provides an exemption for an interest in a FIF superannuation interest or a foreign life insurance policy acquired and held by a natural person who is a non-resident or a transitional resident. See ¶5-700. Pension and annuity exemption There is also a FIF exemption for certain foreign private pensions and annuities derived from an interest in a policy that the person has provided consideration for when: ▪ the person was not resident in New Zealand ▪ the person was resident in New Zealand but in the period ending three years after the end of the income year in which the person last became a New Zealand resident, or ▪ the person was resident in New Zealand but the consideration was provided as a result of commuting or transferring the person’s interest in a superannuation fund in anticipation of the person ceasing to be a New Zealand resident. (See the Appendix to Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 5, September 1996 and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 2, February 2001 at 38.) Also, the person’s future benefits under the pension or annuity must not be able to be assigned or exchanged for a current receipt of cash or other property. An exception applies for an assignment to a spouse under a relationship agreement or an assignment at the cost of a substantial decrease in the present value of the benefits.  Death benefit amounts Another provision that effectively operates as an exemption is s EX 45. No FIF income arises in relation to a death benefit under a life insurance policy where: ▪ the person entered into a life insurance contract: □ before becoming resident in New Zealand □ in the case of a former resident returning to New Zealand, at least 10 years before returning to New Zealand, and □ the benefit was not increased by a voluntary action after the person became a resident, or ▪ the person entered into a life insurance contract before 2 July 1992 and the benefits did not increase as a result of any voluntary action taken on or after 2 July 1992. Law: IT07 ss CQ 5(1)(c), (5), EX 31–EX 43, EX 45  ¶26-130 Calculation methods of FIF income or loss Foreign investment fund (FIF) income or loss from an investment in a FIF is to be calculated according to one of the following calculation methods: ▪ the fair dividend rate method ▪ the comparative value method ▪ the cost method ▪ the deemed rate of return method, or ▪ the attributable FIF income method. Restrictions may apply to limit the adoption of