 is conducted between resident parties. Unsuccessful software development costs Section DB 40B allows taxpayers an immediate deduction for the costs associated with unsuccessful software development where the taxpayer incurs expenditure on the development of software for use in the taxpayer’s business, the development is abandoned before the copyright in the software is depreciable property and, if the development had been completed, the copyright in the software would have been depreciable property. The deduction is available to the extent to which no other deduction has been allowed for the expenditure, and it is allocated to the income year in which the  development is abandoned. The section overrides the capital limitation, but the general permission must still be satisfied. See also ¶13-430. Law: IT07 s DB 40B  ¶10-232 Deductibility of consumable aids A consumable aid is an item used in a production process. The purchase by a farmer of hay for consumption by livestock may be regarded as an example. The cost of consumable aids can be expected to be allowed as a deduction under the general permission. The cost would have the character of a working expense. See also ¶9-011.  ¶10-242 Deductibility of pollution control expenses A person who carries on a business in New Zealand may be allowed a deduction for expenditure of a capital nature on ameliorating the effects or future effects of discharges of contaminants or making of noise. This applies if the expenditure is not incurred in relation to revenue account property, unless the property is a landfill the person has elected to hold on revenue account. It is possible to anticipate the expenditure by contributing to an environmental restoration account with the Commissioner and deducting contributions when made to the account. See ¶10-412. Classification of expenditure The provisions allowing the deduction not only specify eligible expenditure, but also classify the expenditure into items to provide for spreading treatment of the deduction. The expenditure eligible for deduction (and the item classifications within sch 19) are the costs associated with the following: ▪ investigating and testing for a potential activity or improvement to mitigate future adverse effects of contaminants or on people or animals from the making of noise (pt A, item 1)  ▪ improvements on land in New Zealand to mitigate future adverse effects of contaminants or on people or animals from the making of noise (pt A, item 2) and associated screen planting (pt A, item 3) ▪ riparian planting on land in New Zealand to ameliorate the effects of contaminants or on people or animals from the making of noise (pt A, item 4) ▪ an activity intended to minimise the future discharge of contaminants or the future making of noise (pt A, item 5) ▪ monitoring discharges of contaminants or the making of noise (pt B) ▪ monitoring the detrimental effect on the environment of discharges or on people or animals from the making of noise (pt B) ▪ post-discharge clean-up costs (pt B) ▪ post-discharge costs to remove an improvement on the land (pt B) ▪ the post-discharge installation of impermeable surfaces (pt B) ▪ post-discharge replanting costs (pt B), and ▪ the disposal of stored contaminants (pt B). Exclusions There are a number of exclusions. No deduction is allowed for expenditure relating to: ▪ land reclamation ▪ dredging, unless the dredging is to remedy the adverse effects of contaminants, and  ▪ the acquisition of land. Formula for deduction The deduction allowed in an income year is calculated according to the formula: rate × value where: rate is the appropriate rate to the particular item of expenditure, and value is the adjusted tax value under the straight-line method or the diminished value under the diminishing value method. The rate is 100% for expenditure that comes within item 1 of pt A or any item under pt B of sch 19. The effect of the formula appears to be to allow a deduction in full in the income year expenditure falling within those items is incurred. The consequence is, for example, that expenditure on monitoring is fully deductible in the year it is incurred. The rate for expenditure that falls within items 2 to 5 of pt A of sch 19 is in accordance with the taxpayer’s choice of one of two depreciation rates given by sch 12. If the person chooses the straight-line method, the rate is the rate set out in column 2 of the Schedule that is nearest to the rate calculated using the formula in s DB 46(7). If the person chooses the diminishing value method, the corresponding diminishing value rate in column 1 of the Schedule is used. The formula in s DB 46(7) provides that the rate is: 100% ÷ assumed life where the assumed life for expenditure associated with a business activity that: ▪ does not require a resource consent is 35 ▪ does require a resource consent is the lesser of 35 and the remaining term of the resource consent at the time the expenditure is incurred.  The rate determined under sch 12 is applied to the value applicable to the expenditure. The value is: ▪ the adjusted tax value of the expenditure under the straight-line method, or ▪ the diminishing value of the expenditure under the diminishing value method. Determination The Commissioner may also issue a determination setting a rate or an assumed life for a particular expenditure on the written request of a person or a group of persons. Section 91AAN of the Tax Administration Act 1994 sets out the matters the Commissioner may take into account in making a determination, the reasons for declining to make a determination and the notice requirements. For the amortisation rates for landfill cell construction expenditure, see Determination DET 05/02 and ¶50-169. The possibility that the business ceases, or that an improvement is destroyed or rendered useless, is also addressed in s DB 46. In any such case, a deduction is allowed for the residue of any expenditure not already deducted. Law: IT07 s DB 46, schs 12, 19; TAA s 91AAN  ¶10-262 Expenditure deemed to be incurred by determination Determinations have been issued by the Commissioner that have the effect of deeming certain categories of taxpayer as having incurred expenditure. The outcome may be to reduce or eliminate assessable income. Expenditure incurred in deriving schedular payments Under s RD 8(3) the Commissioner may determine the amount or proportion of expenditure that a person incurs in deriving particular types of schedular payments. The expenditure amounts determined  in this way are listed below. A fuller discussion of these determinations can be found at ¶3-457. Screen production industry A maximum of $80 per day may be regarded as expenditure incurred in earning the per diem allowance paid to a screen production worker when working away from the person’s normal residence: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 6, July 2018 at 12. See also ¶3-457. Plunket Society honoraria A maximum of $800 pa may be regarded as expenditure incurred in earning an honorarium from the Royal New Zealand Plunket Society Inc: Determination DET 18/02 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 1, February 2019 at 55). See also ¶3-457. School trustees In Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 7, July 2001 at 51 (confirmed in AGENTS Answers, Issue 159, July 2013) the Commissioner determined that the following may be regarded as expenditure incurred in deriving honoraria paid to a school trustee: ▪ $75 per meeting for the chairperson, up to an annual maximum of $825 ▪ $55 per meeting for other trustees, up to an annual maximum of $605. See also ¶3-457. Sports prizes A maximum of $500 per event may be regarded as expenditure incurred in deriving prize money paid at a sporting event or competition: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 9, No 5, May 1997 at 3. See also ¶3-457. Standard-cost household services costs The Commissioner may, as part of a determination made under s 91AA of the Tax Administration Act 1994, determine set amounts for costs that may be treated as being incurred in deriving income or  exempt income from providing certain household services. Determinations have been issued in relation to providers of homebased childcare, boarding services and homeshare care providers. These determinations are explained fully at ¶5-695.  ¶10-272 Deduction for loss on destruction of a building A deduction is allowed for the loss suffered upon the destruction of a temporary building. A temporary building is one that must be demolished or removed upon the completion of a construction project or when plant or machinery housed in the building is removed. This provision supplements the general permission and overrides the capital limitation. The cost of the demolition of a building can generally be expected to be subject to the capital limitation, because there will be an improvement to the capital structure of the business. See C of IR v Lyttelton Port Co Ltd (1997) 18 NZTC 13,273 (CA). The Commissioner has also released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 14/08, “Income tax — costs of demolishing an existing building on a building site” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 8, September 2014 at 22), which confirms that the costs of demolishing an existing building are not deductible as they are of a capital nature. Instead, the costs are taken into account under the depreciation rules in determining the consideration received from the disposal of the demolished building. Law: IT07 s DB 20  ¶10-282 Deductibility of education costs An employer could expect to be allowed a deduction for costs associated with updating the working knowledge of employees. The costs would have the character of a working expense. In FC of T v Finn (1961) 106 CLR 60, the High Court of Australia recognised that expenses associated with maintaining or increasing learning and ability may be incidental and relevant to the earning of assessable  income. It is possible that the regime on entertainment expenditure may operate to reduce the deduction to 50% (¶10-402). Expenses incurred in obtaining a degree or other qualification may be allowed as a deduction if the expenses are not too remote from the earning of assessable income. The acquisition of knowledge is not to be treated as the acquisition of a capital asset. See FC of T v Hatchett 71 ATC 4184. In FC of T v Highfield 82 ATC 4463, it was accepted that a deduction should be allowed for the costs incurred in undertaking a specialist course if the taxpayer intends to utilise the specialist skills, once obtained.  ¶10-286 Deductibility of emissions units and emissions liabilities Acquisition Section DB 60 applies when emissions units are transferred to a person for a price of zero either for removal activities (under s 64 of the Climate Change Response Act 2002 (CCRA)), or by government allocation (under Pt 4, subpart 2 of the CCRA), or under a permanent forestry scheme (before 23 June 2020, in relation to a forest sink covenant (under s 67Y of the Forests Act 1949)). A person is denied a deduction for expenditure or loss incurred as consideration for the emissions unit. This provision overrides the general permission. Forest land When a person incurs a liability under the CCRA for emissions relating to post-1989 forest land or pre-1990 forest land, no deduction is allowed for the liability. See s DB 60B. Under this same provision no deduction is allowed for a liability to transfer emissions units to the Crown under a permanent forestry scheme (before 23 June 2020, a forest sink covenant) either. This provision overrides the general permission. Persons that hold post-1989 forestry land or pre-1990 forestry land on revenue account cannot apply ordinary deductibility principles.  See s DB 61. This is because forestry businesses obtain their deduction by way of the rule that states that emissions units surrendered for liabilities arising from this type of forestry land are treated as being sold for zero. Deductions for emissions liabilities outside the forestry sector The energy, fishing, industry and liquid fossil fuel sectors entered the emissions trading scheme (ETS) in 2010. Generally, for sectors outside the forestry sector, deductions for emissions liabilities are not dealt with under any specific provisions. The ordinary principles that apply for deductibility on an accruals basis are considered sufficient. The year-end deduction for each business will be determined by: ▪ calculating the business’s liability to surrender units under the ETS which is attributable to the income year, in accordance with the methodology prescribed under the CCRA ▪ to the extent that the business has purchased and still holds any emissions units at year-end, the cost of those units (limited to the income year liability), and ▪ to the extent the business holds fewer emissions units than its liability owed at the end of the income year, that shortfall multiplied by the market value of a New Zealand unit at the end of the income year. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 8, October/November 2009, Pt II at 95–96. “Free” emissions units (those issued by Government without payment) are not netted off in the above calculation. They are brought in as income separately. See ¶5-228. An exception to the above relates to the deductibility of fishing quota emissions units. A fishing quota emissions unit is defined as an emissions unit transferred under s 74 of the CCRA to an owner of individual transferable quota and held continuously by the person since its issue.  The application of the ETS to liquid fossil fuels resulted in an increase to the cost of diesel. This is one of the major costs to the fishing sector. The CCRA provides for the allocation of emissions units to compensate owners of fishing businesses for this increase. Consequentially fishing quota emissions units that are held continuously by the person and then surrendered are treated as having been disposed of at market value and reacquired immediately before surrender. See s DB 61. Therefore, any gain on deemed disposal is realised, for tax purposes, at the time of surrender. This only applies if the person does not hold the units on revenue account. Law: IT07 ss DB 60, DB 60B, DB 61  ¶10-292 Deductibility of employee remuneration Payments of employee remuneration can be expected to be allowed as a deduction under the general permission. The expenditure is likely to have the character of a working expense that promotes the derivation of the employer’s assessable income. The capital limitation in some cases will override the general permission to prevent allowance of a deduction for payment of employee remuneration. The capital limitation was applied to the wages paid to electricians and engineers by a newspaper publisher to install and wire up a new unit to the taxpayer’s printing press. The expenses were directed principally to extending the taxpayer’s business organisation rather than the carrying on of the business. See Christchurch Press Co Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC 10,206. Goodman Fielder Wattie Ltd v FC of T 91 ATC 4438 concerned a business conducting research into medical products for possible commercial development. The Court rejected the Commissioner’s contention that the cost of developing a new product for manufacture and sale was of a capital nature. The nature of the taxpayer’s activities required ongoing research into product development. That resulted in recurrent expenditure that was part of the regular cost of trading operations.  Redundancy payments made upon the closure of a business are allowed as a deduction. The possibility of having to pay redundancy is a potential obligation assumed to obtain the benefit of the employees’ services. See C of IR (Hong Kong) v Cosmotron Manufacturing Co Ltd [1997] BTC 465. The purchaser of a business who assumes the obligation to meet the leave accruals of the employees of the vendor who became employees of the purchaser assumes an obligation of a capital nature. See C of IR v New Zealand Forest Research Institute Ltd (2000) 19 NZTC 15,689 (PC). This kind of situation is addressed by specific provisions (see below). Fringe benefits The costs incurred in providing a fringe benefit can be expected to be allowed as a deduction, subject to application of the capital limitation. For example, the cost of book tokens given as a further reward to an employee may be allowed as a deduction, but the cost of purchase of an employee motor vehicle would be capital expenditure subject to a depreciation deduction. The timing of the deduction for a payment of fringe benefit tax is addressed in s EF 1. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which the relevant fringe benefit is granted, regardless of whether the tax is payable in that income year. For example, the tax payable in relation to a fringe benefit provided in the twelfth month of the income year is allowed as a deduction in that income year, even though payment of tax to the Commissioner would not be due until the following income year. See also ¶21-110. Employee benefit funds An employer is allowed a deduction under s DC 6 for an amount paid to, or set aside as, a fund to provide individual personal benefits to employees, provided the fund is not a superannuation scheme and the rights of employees to receive benefits are fully secured. This provision supplements the general permission and overrides the capital limitation.  An employer may be allowed a deduction for contributions made to the trustees of a fund established to acquire the employer’s shares. The contributions could be expected to foster staff productivity by promoting morale. See Heather (I of T) v P-E Consulting Group Ltd (1972) 48 TC 293. In E Bott Ltd v Price (HMIT) [1987] BTC 49, the Court found that an employee share purchase scheme would be designed to benefit employees of the business. A deduction may be allowed for a lump sum paid to establish a trust fund from which future bonuses would be paid to employees. The fund could be regarded as one designed to secure the trust and confidence of employees. See Pridecraft Pty Ltd v FC of T 2005 ATC 4001 (although note that other features concerning establishment of the fund led the Court in that case to conclude that payment of the $15m to establish the fund was a tax avoidance scheme). Superannuation contributions An employer is allowed a deduction under s DC 7 for employer superannuation contributions to a superannuation scheme for employees. This section overrides the capital limitation but the general permission must still be satisfied. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which the contribution is made to the scheme. However, if the contribution is made within 63 days after the end of the income year, the employer may choose to allocate the deduction to the income year: ▪ for which the contribution was required by the superannuation scheme to be made, or ▪ for which the amount of the contribution was calculated taking into account the earnings paid to employees who were members of the scheme during that year. The election must be made before the employer files the tax return for the income year or, if agreed by the Commissioner, within a longer time. Under s EF 2, an amount of employer’s superannuation contribution tax is allowed as a deduction only in the income year of payment of  the contribution attracting the tax, regardless of whether the tax is due and payable in that year. Leave accruals at balance date The deduction available for outgoings on employment income may be allocated under s EA 4 to an income year different from the year in which it was incurred. More specific provisions apply to the leave accruals accumulated upon the sale of a business. At balance date, an employer may have incurred a liability to pay employee remuneration, but not be required to actually pay it. This situation most commonly occurs in relation to the obligation to pay various kinds of leave. For example, in relation to annual leave, employees are entitled to payments for leave as and when they are employed, even though the leave may not actually be taken, and the payment for leave made, until a later income year. The liability to pay the leave is incurred when the employee becomes entitled to payment and not when payment is made. See King Country Electric Power Board v C of IR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,122. An employer’s liability to pay long service leave is incurred when it is clear that the employee will receive payment for the leave rather than when the leave is taken. The employer in The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd (Life Branch) v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,341 was held to have incurred its liability to pay long service leave when an employee reached 15 years of service. From that point, the payment would always be made irrespective of termination for whatever reason or the employee’s death. The Commissioner accepts this decision, although adding the qualification that the liability to pay long service leave is not incurred while the leave is simply accruing. That is because the employee has no right to demand payment. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 8, No 6, October 1996 at 5. The provisions on leave accruals distinguish between amounts owing to shareholder-employees and to other employees. A shareholder-employee for these purposes is a shareholder of a close company who does not receive a regular salary or wages as an  employee or who receives income that may later be allocated to them as an employee. For non-shareholder-employees, s EA 4 applies when an employer is allowed a deduction in an income year for an amount of expenditure on employment income, but the employer has not paid that amount by 63 days after the end of the income year. In that event, unless the employer chooses (see below), the unpaid amount is: ▪ income of the employer for that income year, and ▪ allowed as a deduction under s DB 51 in the following income year. For amounts payable to a shareholder-employee, the 63-day grace period for actual payment is extended to the last day the employer could file a return of income for the income year if the time for filing were extended to its maximum under s 37(5) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. The effect of this regime is that: ▪ all employee remuneration obligations that the employer has incurred during the income year are allowed as a deduction for that income year ▪ included in the employer’s income for that income year is all remuneration obligations that have not been paid within 63 days of balance date (or the following 31 March if the obligation is owed to a shareholder-employee). Note that with effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, the deduction for payments made within 63 days of the income year is optional for taxpayers. For those taxpayers that do not wish to undertake the exercise of determining the date of payments, it is no longer required and they may choose to claim a deduction for expenditure on employment income paid within the income year in their return of income.  Retrospective adjustment to the salary of a shareholderemployee In February 2018, Inland Revenue released standard practice statement, SPS 18/01, “Retrospective adjustments to salaries paid to shareholder-employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 2, March 2018 at 11), (replacing the earlier SPS 05/05 from 1 April 2018). Following the release of SPS 16/01, “Requests to amend assessments” (replaced by SPS 20/03 with effect from 2 June 2020, see ¶2-112), SPS 18/01 sets out the criteria for considering whether the circumstances are appropriate for the Commissioner to agree to retrospectively alter an amount of shareholder’s salary, taking into account the process used in exercising the s 113 discretion in the Tax Administration Act 1994. The statement considers requests to either increase or decrease a shareholder’s salary. The statement states that declaring an amount of shareholder’s salary is a matter of contract between a company and its shareholder. Where a shareholder and company agree that an error has occurred in quantifying the amount of salary to be declared for a year, that error can be corrected without the original contract being voided and a new contract entered into. Where the shareholder and company are able to provide evidence to the Commissioner’s satisfaction that an error has been made in the quantum of shareholder’s salary originally declared, the Commissioner will correct that error. It is irrelevant whether the new salary is greater or less than the original salary that was declared. The Commissioner will not consider using the s 113 discretion to amend assessments unless all parties to that contract agree that an error has been made. Where taxpayers request that a shareholder’s salary be amended and they are unable to evidence that the original salary was declared in error, any amendment to that original salary can only have prospective effect. The statement contains examples of both when the Commissioner generally will agree to adjust an amount of shareholder’s salary and when she will not. Restrictive covenant or exit inducement  A deduction is allowed under s DC 9 for expenditure on obtaining a restrictive covenant or as an exit inducement that is income of the recipient. Allowance of the deduction is subject to the qualification that no deduction becomes available if the recipient performs services of a capital nature for the payer. Disposal of a business and leave accruals The provisions of s DC 10 address the deduction to be allowed for leave accruals when a business or a part of a business is disposed of. The rules distinguish between disposal to an associated person and disposal to a person who is not associated. If the disposal transaction is not between associated persons, the vendor is allowed a deduction for the leave accruals at the time of the disposal. This is provided: ▪ employees of the vendor become employees of the purchaser, and ▪ the parties agree in writing under the disposal arrangements that the purchaser is liable to pay the leave obligations, and the price payable for the business reflects that obligation. To ensure allowance of the deduction, s EA 4(4) deems the vendor to have paid the leave accrual at the time of disposal of the business. Where the parties are associated persons, the purchaser is allowed the deduction. The vendor is not allowed the deduction. Section DC 10(4) ensures that a purchaser is allowed a deduction for satisfying transferred employment obligations to the extent that the amount paid to satisfy the obligations exceeds the provision made by the seller for that amount. In the administration of the leave accruals, the purchaser is authorised to treat the relevant employees individually or as a group.  Seconded employees The position of the leave accruals of an employee seconded to employment with an associated person is addressed by s DC 11. The new employer is allowed a deduction for any payment of employment income that otherwise would have been allowed to the former employer. These provisions could be expected most commonly to have application when an employee is transferred between group companies. Retiring allowances A deduction is allowed under s DC 1 for a lump sum paid by a business as a bonus, gratuity or retiring allowance upon an employee’s retirement. The deduction allowed extends to a lump sum paid when employment ends because of redundancy, loss of office or similar circumstances. The notion of redundancy extends to an employee who is unable to be re-employed in seasonal work in a redundancy kind of situation. The deduction is allocated to the year in which the payment is made. Pensions A deduction is allowed under s DC 2 for a reasonable amount paid as a pension by a business to a former employee or his or her surviving spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner. If the business is a close company, there are additional requirements to the effect that the former employment must have been genuine and that a deed specifies that entitlements are for a fixed period, life or “remarriage” in the case of the entitlements of a spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner. Example: David is a shareholder-employee in a close company. David has worked full time in the company business for the last 15 years, and is intending to retire in two years’ time with the company’s approval. The company pays David a regular salary and deducts PAYE (pay as you earn). The company agrees to pay David a pension of 50% of his current salary, which is $100,000. This pension policy is also available to other employees. A deed is drawn up and is properly executed.  Factors which indicate that David is a bona fide employee are that he is working full time in the company business and is paid a regular salary. It would need to be shown that the level of his salary is reasonably reflective of his position and responsibilities. An indicator that the pension amount is reasonable is that it is also available to other employees who are not associated with the company. If David is a bona fide employee of the company and the level of expenditure is assumed to be reasonable, given that the payments will be made as of right under a deed, the company will be entitled to deduct any pension payments made to him.  Example from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 2, August 1995 at 17. Law: IT07 ss CH 3, DB 51, DC 1, DC 2, DC 6, DC 7, DC 9–DC 11, EA 4, EF 1, EF 2, EJ 21  ¶10-402 Deductibility of entertainment expenses The deduction allowed for expenditure on certain entertainment is 50% of the amount that would otherwise be allowed as a deduction. There are five categories of expenditure on entertainment for which deductibility is limited to 50%, subject to several exclusions. Entertainment expenditure Expenditure on entertainment encompasses expenditure on: ▪ a corporate box, marquee or similar exclusive area, permanent or temporary, at a sporting, cultural or other recreational event occurring off the business premises (including tickets and rights of entry) ▪ holiday accommodation, including incidental food and drink, with the exception of accommodation costs which are merely incidental to business activities or employment duties ▪ pleasure craft ▪ food and drink provided off business premises, or ▪ food and drink, except light refreshments such as a morning tea which are provided on premises in an area restricted to senior  employees or at a party or similar social function. It is clarified that entertainment expenditure extends to costs on hiring crockery, glassware, utensils, waiting staff, music or other entertainment. The Commissioner has also clarified, in an operational position published on 15 September 2016, that the deduction for expenditure on food and drink provided as gifts to customers, clients or suppliers, etc, off business premises is limited to 50% (see Example 5 below). Exclusions The following categories of expenditure are not classified as entertainment subject to the 50% deductibility limitation: ▪ food or drink consumed in the course of travel for work, unless the travel is mainly for entertainment or the food and drink is consumed at a client or social function ▪ light refreshments at a conference or educational course and food and drink at a conference or educational course that runs for at least four hours (exclusive of meal times), unless the event is mainly for entertainment ▪ an amount that is exempt income of an employee under ss CW 17B, CW 17C and CW 17CB (which relate to relocation expenses and expenditure on meals) and a light meal consumed as part of employment duties in an area reserved for senior employees ▪ entertainment expenditure incurred in the course of a public promotion of the products of the business, provided the entertainment is enjoyed equally with the public ▪ entertainment that comprises the business of the taxpayer (such as licensed premises: see below) ▪ entertainment for charitable purposes  ▪ entertainment consumed outside of New Zealand, or ▪ entertainment that is income of the recipient or that attracts a liability for fringe benefit tax (a liability arises if the employee may choose when to use the entertainment benefit or it is not received in the course of employment duties). Example 1: A person travels from Wellington to Auckland on business and takes a client out to dinner. Meal costs are only 50% deductible. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 12, May 1995 at 16.  Example 2: A manufacturer promoting a new model of video camera holds a demonstration for home appliance dealers. The cost of providing drinks and nibbles at the display are fully deductible. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 12, May 1995 at 17.  Example 3: A soccer club arranges a sponsorship deal with a tavern. The tavern pays for the team’s uniforms, bearing the tavern’s name, and provides alcoholic beverages for the team to enjoy after the game. The cost of providing the uniforms is fully deductible to the tavern, because it is essentially an advertising expense; but the cost of providing the beverages is only 50% deductible, because it is provided off the premises and cannot be enjoyed by members of the public. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 12, May 1995 at 17.  Example 4: An accountant pays to attend a monthly networking breakfast function with other accountants in his local area where they discuss issues and pass on and accept referrals for business. The cost of the breakfast is only 50% deductible.  Example 5: Bob is a real estate agent. Each time he arranges the sale of a house, Bob delivers a bottle of champagne to the owner. He also sends a gift basket by courier to the purchaser. The gift basket contains a bottle of wine, some cheese and various  household items such as tea towels and soaps. Bob will only be able to deduct 50% of the cost of the bottle of champagne. This is because he is providing entertainment in the form of drink and doing so off his business premises. For the gift basket, Bob can deduct the full cost of the tea towels and soap, because an appropriate apportionment should be made for items that are not food and drink. However, he can only deduct 50% of the cost of the wine and cheese (or, if the cost is not separately identifiable, an amount appropriately apportioned as the cost of the wine and cheese). See Commissioner’s Operational Position.  Licensed premises operators and entertainment Expenditure incurred by licensees on special offers of food or beverages made available to members of the general public, or an allowance paid to an employee to cover the costs of providing the special offers, will not be entertainment expenditure deductible as to only 50%. See public binding ruling BR Pub 04/02, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 3, April 2004 at 4. The types of special offer covered by the ruling include happy hours, free drinks or free food on certain days or at certain times, “two meals for the price of one” deals and “toss the boss” competitions. Any allowance paid to an employee such as a bar manager is also covered by the ruling. Goods and services tax (GST) The limitation rule for expenditure on entertainment may also have GST consequences. The component of the expenditure which is not allowed as a deduction is treated as a taxable supply attracting GST. See ¶32-023. Mixed-use assets The limitation rule for expenditure on entertainment does not apply to expenditure incurred in relation to the private use of an asset under the mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG. Those rules establish a basis for apportioning deductible expenditure relating to land and certain boats and aircraft that are used both privately and to earn income. See ¶10-035. Law: IT07 ss DD 1–DD 11  ¶10-412 Deductibility of payments to environmental restoration accounts A deduction is allowed for payments made in relation to an environmental restoration account maintained with the Commissioner. The deduction extends to a transfer received from another person’s account as being a payment to the recipient’s account. A refund from the account may be obtained when the restoration expenditure is actually incurred. Modest interest on the account balance is paid in the meantime. Requirements for environmental restoration account A taxpayer is able to have an environmental restoration account with the Commissioner where all of the following apply: ▪ the taxpayer carries on business in New Zealand ▪ the taxpayer expects to subsequently incur expenditure on a capital asset, or a landfill elected to be held on revenue account, that comprises: □ monitoring discharges of contaminants or the making of noise □ monitoring the detrimental effect on the environment of discharges or on people or animals from the making of noise □ post-discharge clean-up costs □ post-discharge costs to remove an improvement on the land □ the post-discharge installation of impermeable surfaces on land □ post-discharge replanting costs, and  □ the disposal of stored contaminants, and ▪ the costs are provided for in the taxpayer’s financial statements without qualification by the auditors of the business. Exclusions Some expected costs are specifically excluded from supporting a payment to an environmental restoration account. No payment to the account may be made for costs on: ▪ land reclamation ▪ dredging, unless the dredging is to remedy the adverse effects of contamination, and ▪ the acquisition of land. Amount of deduction The deduction allowed for a payment to the Commissioner of more than $1,000 for credit to the account is the lesser of the payment made or the person’s maximum payment divided by the person’s tax rate (or possible maximum tax rate if the person is an individual). The person’s maximum payment is the lesser of: ▪ the difference between the maximum account balance and the year-end account balance, or ▪ the amount, if any, given for the years before the 2010–11 income year, following a payment for the 2005–06 income year by application of the formula: level increase + (year × 0.2 × initial level) − contents where: level increase is the year’s maximum account balance that is in excess of the maximum account balance for the 2005–06 income year  year is one for the 2005–06 income year increasing by one for each subsequent income year up to a maximum of five initial level is the maximum account balance for the 2005–06 income year, and contents is the year-end balance of the account. The person’s maximum account balance is the product of the formula: provision × tax rate where: provision is the provision in the financial statements for future eligible expenditure, and tax rate is the person’s tax rate (or possible highest tax rate if the person is an individual). Once calculated, the deduction is allowed for the year of payment to the Commissioner. A payment is still for an income year even though it is not paid until six months after the end of the income year (or even later if the Commissioner grants an extension of time). In the event that the payment exceeds the person’s maximum payment for the income year, the Commissioner is required to refund the excess without interest. The refund is excluded income. Interest at a rate of 3% per annum is payable in relation to a payment to an environmental restoration account. Refund from account An application may be made to the Commissioner for a refund from the account when expenditure eligible for the account has been incurred, or the amount of the refund sought is the excess over the maximum account balance for the income year. The amount of the refund is calculated by dividing the refund by the person’s tax rate (or the highest rate if the person is an individual). The amount of the refund cannot exceed the balance of the account at the time of the  refund. The refund is assessable income under s CB 28 but will be balanced by a deduction for the restoration expenditure incurred which supports the refund. With effect from 23 July 2020, the refund of an amount in an environmental restoration account must be made by direct credit to a nominated bank account, unless the Commissioner is satisfied that paying by direct credit would result in undue hardship to the person or is not practicable. Transfer from account A transfer may be made to another person of the balance in an environmental restoration account. This is where there has been an assumption by that other person of the obligations that supported payments to the account in the first instance. Assessable income arises under s CB 28 for the transferor. The recipient is allowed a deduction for the transfer as if it had been a payment to an environmental restoration account. Upon death, bankruptcy or liquidation, the balance of the account is transferred to the environmental restoration account of the person to whom the obligations have been transferred. Any such transfer is treated as being a payment by that person to their environmental restoration account. If an amalgamation occurs, the environmental restoration account of the amalgamating company is transferred to the amalgamated company. Any prior payment, transfer or refund is treated as having been made by the amalgamated company. A member of a consolidated group may have an environmental restoration account through reliance on the audited financial statements for the group. Law: IT07 ss CB 28, CX 52, DQ 4, EK 1–EK 23; TAA s 184A  ¶10-440 Deductibility of feasibility expenditure To be deductible, feasibility expenditure must first satisfy the test in s DA 1(1), ie there must be a sufficient nexus between the expenditure  and the taxpayer’s business. Feasibility expenditure is often incurred at the early stages of a new venture. However, to be deductible, feasibility expenditure must not be incurred preliminary or preparatory to the commencement of the business. If the expenditure is deductible under s DA 1(1), it is then necessary to determine whether a deduction is denied by virtue of the feasibility expenditure being capital in nature (s DA 2(1)). Trustpower decision The leading case on the deductibility of feasibility expenditure in New Zealand is the Supreme Court decision in Trustpower Ltd v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-061. The case concerned expenditure incurred by Trustpower in applying for and obtaining consents for four possible new electricity generation projects. In that case, Trustpower claimed that the expenditure on the resource consents was incurred as part of its feasibility analysis of the four projects and before it had made its build or buy decision and committed to the construction of any of them. The High Court ((2013) 26 NZTC ¶21-047) accepted that the expenditure was feasibility expenditure and deductible on revenue account because it was incurred in the course of deriving income from the generation and sale of electricity. The High Court then considered whether the resource consents were stand-alone capital assets and concluded they were not. The Court of Appeal ((2015) 27 NZTC ¶22-010) overturned this decision. The Court of Appeal held that the disputed expenditure did not satisfy the general permission and was on capital account. The expenditure was incurred for the purpose of enabling Trustpower to extend or expand its electricity generation business. It was incurred in taking preliminary steps and then applying for and obtaining resource consents for four projects that were in the development pipeline. The development pipeline was a means of determining the viability, feasibility, and costs of building new generation capacity. New generation capacity related to the acquisition of the means of production by extending the business organisation. The expenditure had the purpose of acquiring assets that would be part of the profit-  making structure of the business, namely the addition of four new projects. The disputed expenditure was not incurred in carrying on Trustpower’s business or in earning the income of the existing business or in performing the income-earning operations of the existing business. Trustpower’s profit-making enterprise was the generation and retailing of electricity, not the development of its pipeline of possible new projects or the investigations of, and applications for, resource consents for those projects. The Court held that all of the “feasibility expenditure” related to possible future capital projects. Feasibility expenditure in relation to a capital asset will be on capital account. The Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s decision, dismissing Trustpower’s appeal, although the Supreme Court disagreed with the Court of Appeal’s approach. The Supreme Court concluded that the expenditure was incurred by Trustpower in the course of carrying on its business as a generator and retailer of electricity and therefore the general permission was satisfied. However, the expenditure fell within the capital limitation and was therefore not deductible. The Supreme Court rejected the approach it referred to as the “commitment approach”, which considers whether a decision had been made to commit to the project in question, on the basis that it did not provide a logical and principled explanation for why some expenditure is on capital account and some on revenue account. The Court also stated that the subjectivity that is implicit in the commitment approach would give rise to practical problems. The expenditure on obtaining resource consents in this case was directly related to specific projects that would be on capital account if they came to fruition. The projects could not proceed without resource consents. Obtaining the consents thus represented tangible progress towards their completion. The expenditure was thus on capital account and not deductible. The Supreme Court did state that expenditure associated with early stage feasibility assessments may be deductible, as such assessments can be seen as a normal incident of business. Expenditure that is not directed towards a specific project or that is  so preliminary as not to be directed towards the advancement of such a project is likely to be seen as being on revenue account. Commissioner’s statement The Commissioner had previously issued an interpretation statement, IS 08/02, “Deductibility of feasibility expenditure”, in June 2008. The interpretation statement contained a comprehensive analysis of the relevant case law and set out the Commissioner’s views on the application of the two tests for deductibility of feasibility expenditure contained in s DA 1(1) (general permission) and s DA 2(1) (capital limitation). However, significant doubt was thrown on the Commissioner’s statement following the Supreme Court decision in Trustpower, in which the Court rejected the commitment approach. The Commissioner has since stated that she will be applying the principles in the Supreme Court’s decision in relation to any binding ruling applications, and in any future challenges, and so tax positions taken after the date of the judgment should take the decision into account. However, she will not be actively reviewing previous years where taxpayers have applied the approach in IS 08/02. In February 2017, the Commissioner issued interpretation statement, IS 17/01, “Income tax — deductibility of feasibility expenditure” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 3, April 2017 at 15), which updates and replaces IS 08/02. The main changes are that a discussion of the Trustpower decisions has been included and the analysis of that part of the statement dealing with the capital limitation has been updated to reflect the Supreme Court decision. In particular, references to “commitment” as a relevant factor have been removed and replaced with consideration of whether there has been material advancement of (or tangible progress on) a specific capital project (or asset or other enduring benefit). The scope of the statement states that it applies where, having regard to the nature of a taxpayer’s business, feasibility expenditure of the type in question is incurred as an ordinary incident of business and is recurrent in nature. Note that it does not consider the operation of specific deduction provisions that might give a deduction where a deduction would otherwise not be available.  The statement acknowledges that, in many situations, it is likely that feasibility expenditure will be non-deductible, either because it is incurred preliminary to or preparatory to the commencement of a business or income-earning activity, or it is capital in nature. For a deduction to be claimed, it will be necessary for the feasibility expenditure to be incurred by the taxpayer: ▪ in the derivation of assessable income (either from the ultimate exploitation of the product of the expenditure in a business or income-earning activity or by sale of the product of the expenditure), and ▪ as an ordinary incident of a particular business or incomeearning activity. Feasibility expenditure incurred preliminary, or preparatory, to the establishment of a business or income-earning activity will not be deductible because it will not fulfil the required statutory nexus between the expenditure and the taxpayer’s business or incomeearning activity. It is critical to determine the true nature of the business. The statement discusses the tests for determining whether a business has commenced and notes that a determination of the point at which a taxpayer makes a firm commitment to go into a business or an income-earning activity is critical for establishing the earliest time at which that business or income-earning activity may have commenced. However, commitment alone is insufficient. The profit-making structure must also have been established and current operations must have begun. To be deductible, the feasibility expenditure must then have the requisite nexus with the business or income-earning activity. The feasibility expenditure must be incurred as part of the ordinary current operations of that business or incomeearning activity. Example 1: Two friends who are working for a large engineering company are considering setting up an engineering business of their own. They incur expenditure in the first six months  of 2016 investigating possible ways to operate a business, including obtaining advice from an accountant and a solicitor and sounding out potential clients. In July 2016, they agree they will establish the business and, having secured several clients and set up an office, they resign from their current positions. They begin to actively work on establishing their processes and databases, and in September 2016 they commence work for their first clients. The expenditure incurred before July 2016 is not deductible. It was preliminary and preparatory to the establishment of an income-producing activity. A firm decision to proceed with the business had not been made, the profit-making structure was not in place and normal business operations had not commenced. The expenditure incurred from July 2016 is deductible, subject to the capital limitation (discussed below). The decision to commit to the business has been made, the profitmaking structure is in place and current operations have begun. Therefore, the business has commenced. This is the case regardless of the fact that work for a particular client does not commence until September 2016.  When feasibility expenditure is deductible under the general permission, it is still necessary to consider whether the deduction is denied as being expenditure of a capital nature. The statement states that this must be determined on the facts of any particular case. When feasibility expenditure forms part of the normal business operations and is not adding to the business structure or undertaken with a view to obtaining an enduring benefit, case law indicates the expenditure will more likely be treated as being on revenue account and deductible. Where the taxpayer’s ultimate goal is intended to result in the acquisition or development of a capital asset (or other enduring benefit), the relationship between the expenditure and the capital asset (or benefit) must be considered. Where the asset that may ultimately be acquired or developed will be part of the taxpayer’s profit-making structure and not part of the income-earning process, generally, any expenditure will be on capital account. However, the Commissioner acknowledges that some expenditure on the early stages of feasibility work may be deductible. Based on the Supreme Court’s decision in Trustpower, the Commissioner’s view is that feasibility expenditure that is incurred on a recurrent basis as a normal incident of the taxpayer’s business is likely to be deductible in two related situations: First, where it is not directed towards a specific capital project (or the acquisition of a potential capital asset, or other enduring  benefit, as applicable). This will usually, but not always, be where initial feasibility work is being undertaken before a specific capital project or projects (or capital asset or assets or enduring benefit or benefits) is identified. It is a question of fact and degree when expenditure will be sufficiently connected to a capital project, asset or other enduring benefit. However, in the Commissioner’s view, the project, asset or benefit need only be identified in general terms; the exact details do not need to be known. However, where expenditure is referable to a specific capital project, asset or benefit, it is still possible that the expenditure may be revenue in nature. Second, where, even though a specific project (or asset or benefit) has been identified, the expenditure is so preliminary as not to be directed towards materially advancing that specific project (or capital asset or enduring benefit). This can be contrasted with expenditure that is aimed at making tangible progress on a capital project (or asset or benefit). Deductibility does not turn on the success or failure of the project. The expenditure must be considered at the time it is incurred. Example 2: A company undertakes continual investigations into potential quarry sites as part of its normal business operations. The initial investigations involve: ▪ an employee travelling around the country to identify possible suitable locations ▪ contacting land owners at those locations to determine whether they are amenable to selling or leasing their land to the company, and ▪ engaging a geologist to write a preliminary report on the suitability of the site for quarrying. The company considers the information and determines which sites it will spend money on to seek to develop. If a site proceeds to the next step, the company will enter into negotiations with the land owner to purchase or lease the land, commission more detailed technical and environmental impact reports, and apply for appropriate resource consents to operate the quarry. Following this, a final decision is made to proceed with development of the quarry in question. The point at which the company has a specific project will depend on the circumstances. If, for example, the company is just looking around to see what quarry options may be available and has no particular quarry specifications in mind, the costs  of the employee travelling around the country to identify possible locations are likely to have been incurred before any specific project being identified. However, if, for example, the company wanted to develop a quarry to certain specifications and the employee was looking for a suitable location, then it is more likely that there is already a specific project in existence. In either case, it is likely that once suitable sites have been identified and discussions with landowners are taking place, this expenditure will be related to a specific project. However, regardless of when it could be said that the expenditure was related to a specific project, the expenditure of the company in undertaking its initial investigations into potential quarry sites is deductible (ie expenditure on the identification of potential sites, initial discussions with landowners and the preliminary geological reports). The expenditure is of a type incurred on a recurrent basis by the company in the normal course of its business. Further, the expenditure is not directed towards the material advancement of a specific capital project (or capital asset or other enduring benefit). However, the subsequent expenditure on negotiations with landowners, detailed technical and environmental reports, and applying for resource consents will be on capital account. This is because the expenditure is aimed at materially advancing the relevant project (or, put another way, making tangible progress on the project).  The statement also includes a summary flowchart. ▸ Note: Recent proposals In May 2017, as part of the Budget 2017 announcements, the Government released a discussion document, “Black hole and feasibility expenditure”. The document discussed and sought submissions on the Government’s proposals for a new treatment of feasibility expenditure and other expenditure that results in an economic cost to a taxpayer, but for which neither immediate deductions nor depreciation deductions are available (commonly referred to as “black hole” expenditure). Following further rounds of targeted consultation in October 2017 and November 2019, and recommendations regarding reforming the tax treatment of feasibility expenditure by the Tax Working Group, legislation was introduced to implement the recommendations. In June 2020, the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill was introduced into Parliament. The Bill contains proposed amendments to codify when businesses can deduct expenditure related to completing, creating or acquiring unsuccessful and abandoned assets or business models. In addition, the proposed rules introduce a new immediate deduction  for expenditure below a specific threshold. Together, the changes are intended to set out the circumstances when expenditure related to business innovation and asset development can be deducted for property that, if completed, created or acquired, would be depreciable property or revenue account property. Proposed new s DB 66 will allow taxpayers to deduct expenditure incurred in completing, creating or acquiring property if: ▪ that property would be— □ depreciable property, including depreciable intangible property, for which the depreciation rate is more than 0%, or □ revenue account property ▪ further progress on the property is abandoned with the result that the property is not completed, created or acquired, and ▪ no deduction in relation to the property or expenditure is allowed under any other provision in the Act. A deduction will be allowed for expenditure related to completing, creating or acquiring the abandoned property. The Commentary to the Bill states that abandonment is when no further money is applied, or the taxpayer documents a decision not to proceed with the property, whichever happens first. The expenditure must satisfy the general permission, ie the taxpayer must have an existing income-earning process to which the expenditure must have sufficient nexus. However, the capital limitation is overridden. The amount of the available deduction will be equal to the expenditure the taxpayer has incurred in relation to the abandoned property and that is not otherwise deductible. The Commentary to the Bill states that the proposed amendment is designed to allow a broad concept of what expenditure can be deducted, including direct and indirect expenses. General overhead expenses that have an indirect relationship or expenses that are later determined to have  been connected with the abandoned property are expected to be within the scope. Deductions for expenditure meeting the above requirements will be spread evenly over five income years starting with the income year in which further progress is abandoned. Example 3 Company B, a water management company, is working on ways to meet demand in times of low-aquifer inflows and drought, to prevent water restrictions. It is exploring the viability of desalination. The company carries out a number of studies on the practicality of building and operating a desalination plant, and researches how water from the plant could be connected to the wider network. Work on the project is abandoned after an assessment determines it is uneconomic, in terms of energy needs and water output, for the plant to meet forecast demand. The project is shelved pending future advances in desalination nanotechnology. Tax impact Under current law, the expenditure incurred in studying the practicality of desalination would be included as part of an asset and does not give rise to an immediate deduction under the Act. As the asset is not completed, there is no tax asset to depreciate. Under new s DB 66, the collective desalination study expenditure would, had the project gone ahead, have formed part of a depreciable asset (water treatment plant and reservoir). The expenditure will be deductible in equal parts over five years. Example taken from the Commentary to the Bill  Proposed new s DB 67 will allow an immediate deduction in the income year for expenditure incurred in completing, creating or acquiring property if the total expenditure is $10,000 or less for the income year and: ▪ the expenditure is related to depreciable property for which the depreciation rate is more than 0% or revenue account property, and ▪ no deduction for the property or expenditure is allowed under any other provision in the Act. There is no requirement under this provision for the property to be abandoned. Like the requirements for proposed new s DB 66, the  expenditure under proposed s DB 67 must satisfy the general permission and not be deductible elsewhere. Example 4 Retailer F specialises in selling cake decoration supplies, cupcakes and other baked goods, and is considering adding takeaway coffee and other hot drinks. It incurs expenditure in doing a cost-benefit analysis and a survey of foot traffic and customer opinion. During the study a coffee shop opens two doors down and the project finishes. About $1,700 was committed to the analysis. Tax impact Under Inland Revenue’s Interpretation statement 17/01, the retailer would not be able to deduct the expenditure as it is not recurrent. Under new s DB 67, as the expenditure is connected with selling revenue account property (trading stock) and a coffee machine (depreciable) and other consumables, it would be deductible. As the expenditure is under $10,000 it would be immediately deductible. Example taken from the Commentary to the Bill  For abandoned property that is later completed, created or acquired, proposed new s CH 13 will claw back the deductions allowed under proposed new s DB 66 by treating the amount deducted as income in the income year the property is completed, created or acquired. The completed property will then be subject to the tax depreciation rules or deductible under s DB 23. The new s CH 13 will not apply to expenditure that has been immediately deducted under the $10,000 de minimis rule in proposed new s DB 67. Example 5 A decade after Company B’s decision not to proceed with a desalination plant [see Example 3 above], population growth in the region and the need for greater water infrastructure has led Company B to restart its earlier work on nanotechnology. Development of the plant and reservoir begins and seven years later it is operational and connected to the wider water supply network. In the year in which the depreciable property is operational, the deduction claimed 17 years earlier is returned as income, with the expenditure included in the cost of the depreciable property. Example taken from the Commentary to the Bill  The proposals are intended to apply from 1 April 2020 for the 2020– 21 and later income years. Law: IT07 ss DA 1(1), DA 2(1)  ¶10-442 Deductibility of fidelity fund levies The Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand and the New Zealand Law Society impose annual levies on practising members to supplement their respective fidelity funds. These levies are fully deductible for income tax in the income year in which practitioners incur them. This is regardless of whether payment is made in one sum or by instalments over a number of income years. The full GST liability occurs at the earlier time of payment or when the service is invoiced. The timing of the corresponding GST input tax credit depends on the circumstances of the individual practitioner. Those registered on an invoice basis may claim the input tax credit at the earlier of being invoiced or payment. Those registered on a cash or hybrid basis may claim on the actual payments basis. In either case, the practitioner must hold a tax invoice. A practitioner who is below the threshold for GST registration and who has not registered voluntarily may not claim any GST input tax credits. Instead the full GST-inclusive amount of the levy is deductible for income tax purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 7, March 1993 at 1.  ¶10-446 Deductibility of film costs Deductibility of cost of acquiring completed film rights A person is entitled to a deduction under s DS 1 for the cost of acquiring a right in a completed film, whether or not the film is completed at the time the right is acquired. However, no deduction is allowed where: ▪ the film right is acquired by a television company and the film right is acquired mainly to enable the film to be broadcast in New Zealand ▪ the film is an advertisement  ▪ the cost is film production expenditure ▪ s DS 2B (deduction for film rights acquired for disposal) applies. The timing of the deduction is governed by s EJ 4 or EJ 5, depending on whether the film is a feature film. A “feature film” is a 35 mm film that is produced mainly for the cinema and has a duration of not less than 75 minutes. Costs associated with the acquisition of rights in a feature film are generally deductible over 24 months. The amount of the deduction is the lesser of: ▪ an apportioned amount calculated under s EJ 4(3) or the amount of film income derived in the income year, whichever is the greater, or ▪ the remaining deduction (if there is a remaining balance that has not been deducted in a previous income year). Costs associated with the acquisition of rights in a film that is not a feature film are generally deductible in two years. At the end of the first income year in which the film right is acquired or completed, whichever is the later, 50% of the costs can be deducted. If the income from the film rights at that time exceeds 50% of the cost, then the deduction can be increased to an amount equal to the income earned, but the deduction cannot exceed the total cost. The balance of the costs are deductible in the following income year. Deductibility of cost of acquiring film or film rights with intention of disposal A deduction is allowed under s DS 2B for film production expenditure, or the cost of acquiring a film right, if the person making the acquisition intends to dispose of the film or film right. The timing of the deduction is governed by s EA 2. Deductibility of film production costs A deduction is available under s DS 2 for film production expenditure if:  ▪ the film is completed, and ▪ the person has a film right in the film, before it is completed, at the time it is completed or after it is completed. The provisions relating to the deductibility of film production expenditure do not apply if: ▪ the film is produced mainly for broadcast in New Zealand by a television company ▪ the film is intended for showing as an advertisement, or ▪ s DS 2B applies to the expenditure (see below). The costs associated with such films are deductible under the normal tax rules. A deduction is available for film production expenditure, irrespective of whether a large budget film grant has been paid. The timing of the deduction for film production expenditure depends on whether: ▪ the film is a New Zealand film and no large budget film grant has been made for it — see s EJ 7 ▪ the film is not a New Zealand film and no large budget film grant has been made for it — see s EJ 8 ▪ the film is one for which a large budget film grant has been made and is: □ a feature film — see s EJ 4 □ not a feature film — see s EJ 5. New Zealand film A New Zealand film is one which the New Zealand Film Commission certifies as having a significant New Zealand content. The criteria the Film Commission takes into account are as follows:  ▪ the subject of the film ▪ the film’s location ▪ the nationality and place of residence of: □ the author, scriptwriter, composer, producer, director, actors, technicians, editors and other production personnel □ the film owners, and □ the holders of the copyright for the film ▪ the source of finance ▪ ownership and location of the equipment and technical facilities used to make the film, and ▪ any other relevant matter. Application is made to the Film Commission for a provisional certificate which certifies that the film proposal is for a New Zealand film. The Film Commission also issues a final certificate upon completion of the film. The Film Commission has power to revoke any of its certificates at any time if it appears that the application contained incorrect information. Large budget film grants Films that receive a large budget film grant are not entitled to immediately deduct production expenditure. Instead, the deduction will be taken over a two-year period. This treatment applies to both large budget screen production grants and post-production digital and visual effects grants. The definition of a large budget film grant covers both grant types and requires that such payments are: ▪ made in relation to a film or television production ▪ sourced from funds provided by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, and  ▪ authorised by the New Zealand Film Commission in relation to a company that is either resident in New Zealand or that has a permanent establishment in New Zealand. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue is authorised to disclose film expenditure information to the New Zealand Film Commission to enable the Commission to determine whether a company is entitled to a government screen production payment (s 18H and sch 7 cl 35 of the Tax Administration Act 1994). Timing of deductibility of production costs The cost of producing a New Zealand film which has no large budget film grant (government screen production payment) may be deducted in the year the film is completed. This is when the Film Commission has issued a final certificate certifying the film as a New Zealand film. When the film is not a New Zealand film and no large budget film grant was paid, the costs of production may be deducted equally over the year the film is completed and the following income year (ie 50% of the costs may be deducted in each of those years). In either case, deferred fees are deductible at the time the fees are paid. They may not be deducted at the time the taxpayer enters into the liability to pay the fees. The timing of the deductibility of the cost of producing a film for which a large budget film grant has been paid depends on whether the film is a feature film. See above for a discussion of the timing of deductions under ss EJ 4 and EJ 5. Reimbursement of film production expenditure Generally, when a taxpayer reimburses another person for film production expenditure, the reimbursement is deductible as if it were expenditure which the taxpayer had incurred. See s DS 2(2)(a). If the taxpayer reimburses the other person for any interest incurred in producing the film, the taxpayer may treat that payment as film production expenditure. The timing of the deduction for the interest reimbursement payment may be determined under either the film  production rules or the financial arrangements rules. See s DS 2(2) (b) and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 5, May 2003 at 75. When the finance for the film is provided by a limited recourse loan arranged by a promoter, the deduction may be deferred under ss GB 45, GB 46 and GB 48 to the extent the loan is outstanding and the investor continues not to be at real risk of having to repay it. See ¶10-061. Anti-avoidance provisions The Commissioner of Inland Revenue has broad anti-avoidance powers in relation to film production expenditure. The Commissioner may exercise these powers where the Commissioner is of the opinion that a party providing goods and services used in the production of a film is not dealing on an arm’s length basis with the film investors. See s GB 17. This anti-avoidance provision can potentially apply to all film-related expenditure. The Commissioner may also exercise these powers where the Commissioner considers that there has been an arrangement designed to attract a more favourable operation of ss DS 1, DS 2, EJ 7 or EJ 8 than would otherwise be the case. See s GB 18. In both cases, the Commissioner is authorised to overcome the arrangements in question. The Commissioner may also treat film production expenditure on goods and services as incurred on a purely payments basis if liability for the payment is contingent or the period between the supply of the goods or services and the time of payment is considered excessive. See s GB 19. Double-dipping of film expenditure prohibited In 1999, the Government identified an opportunity under the films regime for taxpayers to claim two deductions in relation to film production costs provided for in s EO 4 of the Income Tax Act 1994 (now ss DS 2, EJ 6 and EJ 8 of the Income Tax Act 2007). Sections DS 3 and DS 4 override ss DS 1 and DS 2 by clawing back deductions otherwise deductible under the latter sections to the  extent that the expenditure was effectively reimbursed to the investor. Law: IT07 ss DS 1–DS 4, EJ 4–EJ 9, GB 17–GB 19, YA 1; TAA s 18H, sch 7 cl 35  ¶10-452 Deductions for financial arrangements adjustments To confirm operation of the financial arrangements rules, a deduction is allowed for: ▪ the amount of a negative base price adjustment to the extent of income from the financial arrangement in previous income years: s DB 11 ▪ an amount that is a deduction under a base price adjustment under the old financial arrangement rules: s DB 12 ▪ the amount of the excess where a debtor repays more than the transfer value of a debt that had been transferred to an associate at a discount or where the debtor repays more than the guarantee payment to an associated guarantor: s DB 13 ▪ the loss of a surety who receives a security payment for the loss: s DB 14. A negative result under a base price adjustment is treated as interest expenditure. The amount will be deductible under s DB 11 to the extent that income has been recognised in relation to the financial arrangement in previous income years. Note that where there has been self-remission in relation to the financial arrangement (see ¶19222), the amount of the deduction will be limited to the amount of the person’s self-remission: s DB 11(1B). The normal rules of deductibility under ss DB 6 to DB 8 apply to determine whether a deduction is permitted if the interest expenditure is not deductible under s DB 11. Sureties  There is a restriction under s DB 15 on the deduction that may be allowed to a surety for any expenditure or loss under a security arrangement. No deduction is allowed to the extent that the expenditure or loss is due to one of the following: ▪ the actions of the surety, or an associate of the surety, over the term of the arrangement ▪ the occurrence of an event that could have been influenced by the surety or an associate of the surety, or ▪ the non-occurrence of an event that could have been influenced by the surety or an associate of the surety. The tenor of the restriction is that no deduction is allowed for a payment in honour of a guarantee if the guarantor is responsible for activation of the guarantee. In the routine case, the restriction is unlikely to become operative. The routine case is a shareholder guaranteeing payment of the debts of the shareholder’s company. Adverse trading conditions encountered by the company, not the actions of the shareholder, are more likely to be responsible for nonpayment of the debts and enforcement of the guarantee. Law: IT07 ss DB 11–DB 15, EW 31(4)  ¶10-462 Deductibility of financial planning fees A deduction may be allowed for a fee paid to a financial adviser to review existing investments and make appropriate recommendations. That was the conclusion reached in C of IR v North (1999) 19 NZTC 15,219 in relation to taxpayers with approximately $1m under investment and who approached financial advisers for advice following the receipt of an additional $705,000. The fee of $8,282 paid for their advice was allowed as a deduction on the ground that it was incurred in the course of the maintenance and monitoring of an established portfolio of investments rather than in the establishment of a portfolio. The fee had been described by the adviser as “establishment costs”, but the court applied the  principle that the label used by the parties is not determinative as to whether expenditure is of a capital or income nature. Case T64 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,493 applied the capital limitation in relation to the “portfolio monitoring fee” paid for advice on appropriate investments for the taxpayer as a person entering retirement. The advice related to investment of the funds totalling $374,000 at the taxpayer’s disposal. The fee related to the creation of an investment structure for those capital moneys. In Case U12 (1999) 19 NZTC 9,140, the taxpayer held funds in fixed-interest bank securities. As the deposits had matured, she had shopped around for the best investment rates. She decided to engage a financial planning adviser to assist with decisions on her investment activity. Approximately 40% of her investment capital stayed in similar fixed-interest investments, and the remainder was placed in equity investments. It was found that the taxpayer was an active investor, that her investment aims did not alter fundamentally and that the change was to the mix of investments. The fees paid to the adviser were related to changes to the taxpayer’s incomeearning process, not the income-earning structure, so they were deductible. Interpretation statement on financial planning fees Interpretation statement IS0044, “Financial planning fees — income tax deductibility”, outlines the Commissioner’s views in this area. The statement is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 5, May 2000 at 26. The conclusions reached in the statement are summarised in the table that follows. passive investor  speculative investor  business investor  non-deductible  deductible  deductible  Implementation non-deductible fee  deductible  deductible  Administration  deductible  deductible  Initial planning fee  deductible  fee Monitoring fee  deductible  deductible  deductible  Evaluation fee  deductible  deductible  deductible  Replanning fee deductible  deductible  deductible  Switching fee  deductible  deductible  deductible  The classifications assume that the taxpayer’s investments are directed at the generation of assessable income, and that the rules on prepayments do not require the add-back of income in the year in which the fee is incurred. The deduction allowed for an evaluation, replanning or switching fee for a passive investor is subject to the qualification that the fee is not paid in the context of significant change to the taxpayer’s investment structure. An example of a change of that kind could be to change from the receipt of rental income to interest and dividends.  ¶10-472 Deductibility of fines The conventional view is that a deduction is not allowed for a fine. That view was adopted in IR Commrs v Alexander von Glehn & Co Ltd [1920] 2 KB 553 in relation to the £3,000 paid to settle proceedings brought alleging a breach of legislation prohibiting trading with the enemy during World War I. On that authority, a security company operating armoured cars was not allowed a deduction for the $37,201 paid in one year for 693 parking fines: Mayne Nickless Ltd v FC of T 84 ATC 4458. In McKnight (HMIT) v Sheppard [1999] BTC 236, the House of Lords explained that the prohibition is based on the purpose of punishing the taxpayer and preventing dilution of the penalty by allowing the rest of the community to share in the burden through a deduction for tax purposes. Not all courts have taken this view. The Supreme Court of Canada thought that a fine or penalty may be allowed as a deduction, subject to satisfaction of the requirements generally for deductibility. It is a  matter for Parliament to determine what expenses incurred in earning assessable income are not to be allowed as a deduction. See 65302 British Columbia Ltd v The Queen 99 DTC 5799. The principle that a fine or penalty is not allowed as a deduction does not extend to the more general proposition that no deduction is available for expenditure incurred in the course of operations that are unlawful and involve breaches of the criminal law. On the basis of the more restricted view of the prohibition against deductibility, a drug dealer was allowed a deduction for the loss suffered under a robbery perpetrated when the dealer was about to purchase more drugs as his trading stock. See FC of T v La Rosa 2003 ATC 4510. Example 1: A solicitor was not permitted a deduction for the fine imposed on him by the disciplinary committee of his district law society. See Robinson v C of IR [1965] NZLR 246.  Example 2: A convicted drug dealer could not deduct a fine from income allegedly made from drug dealing. See Case F126 (1984) 6 NZTC 60,174.  Example 3: A company was not permitted to deduct fines imposed for importing goods in excess of its licence. The High Court ruled that in cases where penalties or fines were imposed for a breach of the law, deductions should be denied so that business lawbreakers did not enjoy an advantage over non-business lawbreakers. Allowing a deduction in such circumstances would also tend to encourage lawbreaking and treat it as a legitimate business cost. See Nicholas Nathan Ltd v C of IR (1989) 11 NZTC 6,213.  However, the Taxation Review Authority (TRA) has made obiter (and, therefore, non-binding) statements indicating that a fine or penalty may be deductible in certain circumstances providing there is a sufficient relationship between the expenditure and the derivation of assessable income. Examples given include a fine for a parking  infringement or loading offence (see Case F126 (1984) 6 NZTC 60,174) or a mail courier company incurring a double parking infringement notice while delivering an urgent package to a downtown office (see Case K62 (1988) 10 NZTC 504). More recently the TRA held that fines were not usually deductible. It noted the outcome from New Zealand cases about the nexus test in relation to deductibility of fines was not clear but said that businesses should operate within the law. The Authority considered that a penalty or fine arising from a taxpayer’s illegal activities could not have a sufficient nexus with the taxpayer’s income-earning process so as to create deductibility for the cost of the fine. See Case Z6 (2009) 24 NZTC 14,068 where the TRA held that a transport company was unable to deduct the overloading fines incurred by its truck drivers as expenditure incurred in carrying on a business. Commissioner’s policy on fines The Commissioner issued interpretation statement IS 09/01, “Fines and penalties — Income tax deductibility” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 9, December 2009 at 11), which deals with the deductibility of fines, penalties, and like payments. The conclusion drawn in this statement is that fines and penalties imposed under a statute or regulation are not deductible, regardless of the circumstances, for reasons of public policy.  ¶10-482 Deductibility of franchise fees The capital limitation may apply to prevent the deduction of any fee paid upon the establishment of a franchise relationship. The service station operator in Labrilda Pty Ltd v DFC of T 96 ATC 4303 was not allowed a deduction for the $25,000 accreditation fee paid to Mobil Oil to receive the benefit of the Mobil system, detailing layout of the service station, its operation and the use of Mobil trademarks. Training and financial assistance was also part of the package. The fee was held to be a capital outlay, as one establishing the taxpayer’s profit-yielding subject.  Some support for this view may be found in the cases referred to in the following examples. Example 1: The taxpayer, a sports goods retailer, entered into a franchise agreement with a sports store franchising company and was granted a franchise to operate a specialist sports goods shop. Pursuant to the agreement, the taxpayer paid the franchisor an initial fee to cover various establishment costs of the business. The deduction claimed for the amount of the fee was disallowed. The Taxation Review Authority held that the payment brought into existence an asset or advantage for the enduring benefit of the taxpayer’s business. The franchise payment acquired for the taxpayer the exclusive right and privilege of trading as a particular type of sports shop, access to all the ancillary benefits set out in the franchise agreement and secured a territorial monopoly of that franchise for a minimum of 10 years. See Case S24 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,169.  Example 2: The purchaser of a mobile video library franchise was able to deduct a portion of the franchise fee relating to clothing and stationery, these being linked to the incomeearning process. See Case S71 (1996) 17 NZTC 7,441.  On the issue of whether a franchisee is able to claim depreciation in relation to that portion of a franchise fee that is not deductible, see ¶13-460.  ¶10-492 Deductibility of gifts by companies Companies are allowed a deduction for a gift of money to a charitable organisation approved for charitable gifts tax credit purposes. The list of approved donee organisations is regularly updated on the Inland Revenue website (www.ird.govt.nz — search keyword: donee organisation). The amount of the deduction is limited to the company’s net income (excluding the donations). A deduction is denied to the extent to which the amount is, for the company, a gift of money by a deregistered charity to another charity within 12 months of deregistration.  Law: IT07 s DB 41  ¶10-497 Deductibility of goods and services tax A registered person is not allowed a deduction for a payment of goods and services tax (GST) or the input tax component of a purchase of goods or services. The underlying notion would appear to be recognition of the absence of a real cost for the GST paid and the input tax. The prohibition preventing the deduction of GST is subject to an exception to the effect that a deduction is allowed for the output tax payable when there is a deemed supply, because: ▪ goods and services acquired for the principal purpose of making taxable supplies are subsequently applied for a non-taxable purpose, or ▪ fringe benefits are provided to employees (see ¶32-023), or ▪ imported services are acquired from non-residents (referred to as the “reverse charge rules”, see ¶32-410). In addition to the items listed above, a deduction of GST is also permitted for output tax payable in the following circumstances: ▪ a supply that has been incorrectly zero-rated under the compulsory zero-rating of land rules (see ¶32-505), or ▪ a supply of land that was zero-rated under the compulsory zerorating of land rules (see ¶32-505) but which is subsequently applied to a non-taxable purpose, or ▪ output tax that is payable as a result of adjustments required under the apportionment rules applying from 1 April 2011 (see ¶32-088). In all cases, the above output tax is only deductible to the extent that a deduction (including a depreciation deduction) is permitted for the  related goods or services. No deduction is allowed for output tax payable as a result of adjustments made in relation to capital assets. For the effect of GST on the “cost” of depreciable property, see ¶13064. Law: IT07 ss DB 2  ¶10-502 Deductibility of goodwill Generally, goodwill is a capital asset and consequently a payment for goodwill is non-deductible. See C of IR v LD Nathan & Co Ltd [1972] NZLR 209. However, a payment made to preserve goodwill may be deductible. See Cooke (I of T) v Quick Shoe Repair Service (1949) 30 TC 460. A deduction is also allowed for a payment of goodwill upon the grant or renewal of a lease occurring before 1 April 1993. See ¶5-237 and ¶5-115. Example: A payment made by a taxpayer on an agreement to lease and option to purchase three properties was misdescribed as a “goodwill payment”. The payment was part of the purchase price for the properties and was non-deductible. See Case P6 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,038.  Although not goodwill, a premium paid upon the grant of the right to use land is depreciable intangible property that may be eligible for a deduction by way of depreciation. See ¶13-034.  ¶10-513 Deductibility of expenditure funded by government grant Expenditure may not be allowed as a deduction where it has been financed out of a grant or subsidy from a local authority or a public authority, or if the expenditure has been funded out of a grant-related suspensory loan and that grant or loan is not elected by the recipient to be excluded income under s CX 47(4) (see ¶5-760 and below). Note that the disallowance of a deduction does not apply to  expenditure funded by either a loan under the small business cashflow loan scheme (see ¶1-530) or a loan under the research and development loan scheme (established by Ministerial direction to Callaghan Innovation under s 112 of the Crown Entities Act 2004, notice number 2020-go2811). If the grant or subsidy is repaid, a deduction may be allowed under s DF 2 for the amount repaid. The deduction is allowed in the income year in which repayment is first required. A deduction is not denied to the extent to which a payment is the payment of an R&D loss tax credit and the person’s expenditure is attributable to that payment. Under s CX 47(4) a taxpayer may choose not to treat a research and development growth grant (previously a technology development grant or a technology transfer voucher) as excluded income if a portion has been withheld until the conditions relating to the grant are satisfied. If a taxpayer makes an election under s CX 47(4) not to treat the payment as excluded income, the corresponding expenditure is treated as deductible. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 1, February 2011 at 84–85. Law: IT07 ss CX 47(4), DF 1, DF 2, YA 1  ¶10-530 Deductibility of home office expenses A taxpayer who uses his or her home partly in furtherance of the conduct of a business may be entitled to a deduction for the part of the outgoings that relate to the use of the home for the work-related activities, ie heat, light, rates, insurance, interest on mortgage, house and contents insurance, furniture, equipment, carpet, repairs, and maintenance. The portion is based on the ratio: Area used for income-earning activities Total area of home Actual toll calls incurred in income-earning activities are deductible, as is a portion of the telephone rental. The portion for the rental is based on the ratio of:  Business usage Total usage The deduction is allowed under the general permission. The employment limitation would prevent an employee deducting any home office costs. The following factors assist in ascertaining whether, and to what extent, a deduction may be allowed in the absence of application of the limitation: ▪ when a taxpayer uses his or her home partly in the conduct of a business, a deduction is allowed for an appropriate portion of the outgoings on the home: see C of IR v Banks (1978) 3 NZTC 61,236 (CA), see also Case S17 (1995) 17 NZTC 7,127 ▪ it is a question of fact whether there is a sufficient relationship between the income-earning process and the expenditure in question ▪ it is not necessary for the home to be physically changed to suit the income-earning activities ▪ since it is not necessary to set aside a specific room, an apportionment based on the size of the room used may not be appropriate, and ▪ an apportionment based on criteria such as the amount of time spent on income-earning activities at home as well as the area used may be necessary. Square metre rate method With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, an optional method for the calculation of deductions for dual use premises was introduced. The square metre rate method requires the taxpayer to determine the total area (in square metres) of any separately identifiable parts of buildings on the premises that are used primarily for business purposes (“business square metres”). This area is then multiplied by a single rate (“square metre rate”) to give one part of the deduction. The square metre rate is set by  Inland Revenue based on the average costs of items such as utilities and insurance costs per square metre, but excluding rental or rates and mortgage interest costs. The rate is updated each year and is expected to be reasonably accurate for most taxpayers. The relevant rates that have been set are as follows: Income year  Square metre rate  2017–18  $41.10  2018–19  $41.70  2019–20  $42.75  Taxpayers are also able to claim a deduction for their actual mortgage interest and rates or rental costs (“total premises cost”), based on the proportion of the buildings on the premises used primarily for business purposes (“business proportion”). Thus, the total deduction is calculated using the formula: (total premises costs × business proportion) + (business square metres × square metre rate). Example: Mr Smith has a room in his house which is set aside as an office. He uses the office primarily for business purposes. Mr Smith decides to calculate his deductions for this office for the 2017–18 income year using the new method. The office has an area of 10 m2, while Mr Smith’s house has a total area of 100 m2. Inland Revenue has set the fixed rate for premises for the 2017–18 income year at $41.10/m2. Mr Smith calculates the first part of the square metre rate method using the square metre rate. To do this he simply multiplies the area of his office (in square metres) by the fixed rate. Accordingly, the first part of Mr Smith’s first deduction is: 10 m2 × $41.10/m2 = $411. Mr Smith next calculates the second part of his deduction for his mortgage interest and rates (as Mr Smith owns his house). To do this, he calculates the fraction of his house occupied by his office. He then multiplies his actual mortgage and interest costs by that fraction. The fraction of Mr Smith’s house that is occupied by his office is: 10 m2 office ÷ 100 m2 house = 0.10 (or 10%).  Mr Smith’s mortgage interest for the year is $20,000 and his rates are $3,000. Therefore, Mr Smith’s second part of his deduction is: ($20,000 + $3,000) × 0.10 office fraction = $2,300. Adding the two deductions together, Mr Smith has a total deduction for his office of $411 + $2,300 = $2,711. Accordingly, he can claim a deduction for his home office of $2,711 under the square metre rate method. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 74.  Taxpayers can elect to use the new method for an income year by using it to calculate their deductions in their income tax return. There are no restrictions on the ability of a taxpayer to choose the method. A taxpayer who elects to use the new method will not be entitled to claim any other deductions for the business use of the premises. Operational statement Inland Revenue has released operational statement, OS 19/03, “Square metre rate for the dual use of premises”, which explains how the Commissioner will interpret and apply s DB 18AA (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 7, August 2019 at 54). The item considers the individual requirements of the steps discussed above to calculate the deduction. For the first step, the business square metre step, a taxpayer must determine the area of their buildings that are both “separately identifiable parts of the buildings on the premises” and that “are used primarily for business purposes”. The Commissioner’s view is that for an area to be separately identifiable it does not need to be physically separate from any other area. The use of the phrase separately identifiable means that it needs to be obvious that a particular area is “identifiable” as being used for a business purpose that is separate from any other purpose. Whether an area meets this test is considered objectively. It is a positive test, in that the area cannot, objectively, be identifiable as being used for another purpose (a private purpose, for instance), or for a “neutral” purpose; that is, for no particular identifiable purpose. In practical terms, it will be easier to see that an area of a building is separately identifiable as an area being used for a  business purpose if it has a business asset of some kind within it (computer, business records, inventory for instance) that marks out that area in some way. The Commissioner accepts that part of the premises can be said to be used primarily for a business purpose when it is used for a business purpose (rather than any other purpose) more than 50% of the time. For the second step, the taxpayer must determine the business proportion. This requires the calculation of the total area of all buildings on the taxpayer’s property. This will often include buildings other than the taxpayer’s residence. For instance, it is the Commissioner’s view that a standalone garage is a building, but that many small residential garden sheds are too small to be considered buildings; they are structures. It is relatively common that a taxpayer’s premises will include a dwelling and a standalone garage. Where this is the case, the area of both the dwelling and the garage needs to be included in the calculation, whether or not there is any business use of the garage. IS 10/02 discusses what constitutes a building. “Premises” is a reference to the taxpayer’s entire property. In an urban, residential setting this will generally equate to the buildings and their curtilage. However, in the case of a rural setting, what constitutes the curtilage will be a matter of fact, viewed objectively, in each case. Where the business area is not used primarily for business purposes for the entire year, or the area changes at some time during the year, the amount of the deduction will have to be adjusted. The Commissioner accepts that any adjustment required can be calculated based on the number of complete weeks that the separately identifiable area is used primarily for business purposes. The apportionment does not have to be completed on a daily basis. The operational statement contains a number of examples that illustrate the practical application of the provision. Law: IT07 ss DB 18AA  ¶10-540 Deductibility of insurance premiums The payment of an insurance premium may be allowed as a deduction under the general permission. That is even though the premium may insure against the loss of a capital asset such as a building or plant. The capital limitation does not apply, because the premium can be regarded as a cost of protecting the capital structure without creating an enduring advantage. See Australian National Hotels Ltd v FC of T 88 ATC 4627. The deduction may be allowed even though the premium is paid to another group company under a captive insurance arrangement, particularly if there are valid commercial reasons for the establishment of the captive insurer. See WD & HO Wills (Australia) Pty Ltd v FC of T 96 ATC 4223. An annual valuation fee paid to a valuer to value assets or risks for insurance purposes is also deductible. Loss of earnings/profits insurance A loss of earnings or profits insurance policy is one where benefits are calculated with reference to income lost by the insured as a result of incapacitation. Inland Revenue’s (IR) view is that benefits from this type of policy are assessable. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 4, October 1994 at 8. The employment limitation does not apply to the employee, because any benefit received under the policy is not income from employment. In both cases, the premium can be regarded as incidental and relevant to the activities regularly carried on for the production of assessable income. See FC of T v DP Smith 81 ATC 4114. This category may extend to the premium paid under an extended disablement policy that pays a benefit in the form of a weekly income calculated according to lost income. Example: An employee in a plumbing business takes out a policy which provides for the lesser of:  ▪ the amount of cover, which is a dollar amount specified in a schedule to the policy, or ▪ 80% of average weekly income. Average weekly income is the higher of the following amounts: ▪ the weekly average in the 12 months before disability, or ▪ the weekly average in any 12 months in the three years before disability. Premiums are not payable during the period the employee is disabled and claiming under the policy. Under IR’s policy, this is a loss of earnings policy. Benefits are calculated at the time of claim with reference to earnings. The employee is assessable on the benefits received and can deduct the premiums paid. The premium waiver benefit does not give rise to income and has no tax consequences. Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 4, October 1994 at 10.  See also CCH, New Zealand Tax Planning Report, No 6, December 2005 at 46. Professional indemnity policies Following retirement, a professional person may continue to pay premiums on a professional indemnity insurance policy for protection against possible negligence claims arising from work carried out before retirement. IR’s view is that premiums paid are deductible provided the person has income other than from employment. Sickness and accident insurance Personal sickness or accident insurance policies are policies that provide for the payment of a sum that is specified in the insurance policy and that is payable if the insured person is incapacitated as a result of an accident or sickness. A benefit received under such a policy will generally be exempt income, provided the payment is not calculated according to loss of earnings. Questions We’ve Been Asked On 23 February 2018, the Commissioner released two Questions We’ve Been Asked. Both QB 18/04, “Income tax — Insurance — Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employee  with employer paying the premiums on employee’s behalf” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 28), and QB 18/05, “Income tax — Insurance — Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 32), conclude the employer will generally be entitled to a deduction for the premiums paid. See further at ¶3-185. Life and accident insurance policies The deductibility of premiums paid by employers on life or accident insurance policies taken out for or on the lives of employees must be decided on by the facts of each case. The decision depends on the purpose for which the policy was taken out, and the manner in which the proceeds are applied, or are available to be applied. The following are general guidelines: ▪ Endowment or whole of life policies: □ Where the employee has an indefeasible right to the proceeds, the premiums are deductible by the employer. □ Where the employer is to receive the proceeds, the premiums are not deductible unless it can be shown that the policy was on the life of a key employee and was taken out by the employer for the purpose of protecting against loss of profits following the death of that key employee. In these circumstances the proceeds are assessable to the employer who may offset premiums paid over the period of the policy against the proceeds in the year the proceeds are received. ▪ Temporary or term life insurance policies: □ Where the employer has no beneficial interest and the employee has an indefeasible right to the proceeds, the premiums are deductible by the employer. □ Where the proceeds are payable to the employer, the premiums paid are deductible and the proceeds assessable  income. Questions We’ve Been Asked In February 2018, IR released two Questions We’ve Been Asked on term life insurance. QB 18/02, “Income tax — Insurance — Term life insurance policy taken out by employee with employer paying the premiums on employee’s behalf” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 24), concludes that the amount of the premiums in that scenario is deductible to the employer and subject to PAYE for the employee. QB 18/03, “Income tax — Insurance — Term life insurance policy taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 3, April 2018 at 26), also concludes that the amount of the premiums in that scenario is deductible to the employer, but concludes the amount of the premiums is subject to FBT. Key-person or key-man insurance In June 2017, IR released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/06, “Income tax: Insurance — Key-person insurance policies” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 7, August 2017 at 3). The item deals only with key-person (also referred to as “key-man” or a type of “loss of profits”) policies (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 7, August 2017 at 3). These policies are taken out for the purpose of replacing lost business profits as a result of something happening to a key person in the business. The item concludes that a lump sum or a fixed periodic sum paid under the policy is taxable income of the employer under s CB 1 (business income) and that premium amounts paid for a key-person insurance policy are deductible under s DA 1. See further at ¶3-185. Group insurance policy In December 2017, IR released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 17/10, “Income tax and fringe benefit tax — Insurance — Group insurance policy taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 1, February 2018 at 19). The insurance may be term life cover, accident/medical cover, or both. The item concludes that the employer will generally be entitled  to a deduction for the premiums paid as a business cost, just like salary or wages. For a discussion of the features a group insurance policy must have for the item to apply, see ¶3-185. Forward exchange cover The Commissioner permits a deduction for the cost of forward exchange cover insurance. The deduction is allowed in the year the expense is incurred. The Commissioner considers that any proceeds payable under the policy are to be included within the policyholder’s assessable income. A deduction has been permitted for premiums paid on a policy to protect against exchange losses on an overseas loan. The premiums, in common with the interest also payable, were part of the regular demands on the income of the business. See Australian National Hotels Ltd v FC of T 88 ATC 4627. Policies used as securities for loans In interpretation statement IS 13/03, “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure incurred in borrowing money — section DB 5” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 1, February 2014 at 3), the Commissioner considers that insurance premiums paid in respect of a life insurance policy taken out as security for a loan are not deductible under either s DB 5 (see ¶10-182) or DA 1. Insurance premiums on policies that are used as security for loans are deductible in certain circumstances. A transitional approach applies whereby the Commissioner will not seek to disallow certain deductions claimed for insurance premiums before the beginning of a taxpayer’s 2015 income year. See further at ¶10-182. Product rulings For further discussion on the distinction between loss of earnings and sickness and accident insurance see product rulings BR Prd 99/8, BR Prd 98/5, BR Prd 97/17, BR Prd 96/1, BR Prd 95/5, BR Prd 95/11, BR Prd 95/12 and BR Prd 95/13. These rulings have expired but may serve as guidance.  ¶10-650 Deductibility of interest  A company is automatically allowed a deduction for interest if the requirements of s DB 7 are met. Other taxpayers are allowed a deduction for interest if the requirements of the general permission are satisfied. A further provision allows a company to deduct interest payable under a borrowing to acquire shares in a group company. In all cases, the capital limitation is specifically excluded to potentially prevent interest being allowed as a deduction. The capital limitation could have potentially applied, for example, in relation to interest on funds borrowed to purchase a property that is retained as vacant land pending development. See Wharf Properties Ltd v C of IR (Hong Kong) [1997] BTC 173. Automatic deduction for companies Certain companies are allowed a deduction under s DB 7 for interest incurred. The deduction is allowed as a supplement to the general permission, with the consequence that the requirements of that provision do not need to be satisfied. The deduction allowed overrides the capital limitation, the exempt income limitation and the withholding tax limitation. The deduction may be regarded as automatic in the sense described in the heading to s DB 7 that “most companies need no nexus with income”. However, there are qualifications. The automatic deduction provisions do not apply to a qualifying company. No deduction is allowed for interest paid to a foreign revenue authority that has been imposed in relation to unpaid tax (see ¶10915). A company that derives exempt income receives the benefit of the automatic deduction only if the exempt income is exempt dividends from a wholly owned subsidiary, profits from the disposal of treasury stock or exempt stake money ancillary to the company’s horsebreeding business. If another member of a wholly-owned group derives exempt income, it must be one of those three kinds for the automatic deduction to continue to apply.  A non-resident company is allowed the deduction only to the extent that the interest expense is incurred in the course of carrying on a business through a fixed establishment in New Zealand. Section DB 7 is overridden for interest expenditure that is subject to apportionment under the new mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG. See ¶10-035. With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, s DB 7 is also overridden in relation to interest expenditure subject to subpart DE (Motor vehicle expenditure) if a company is a close company that has elected to apply that subpart instead of the FBT rules (see ¶10-710 and ¶21-070). Borrowing to acquire shares in a group company A company is allowed a deduction under s DB 8 for interest incurred on money borrowed to acquire shares in another company that is in the same group of companies. The deduction is allowed as a supplement to the general permission, meaning that it is not necessary to satisfy the requirements of that provision for the deduction to be allowed. Specifically excluded are the capital limitation, the exempt income limitation and the withholding tax limitation. Amalgamations are addressed. The deduction continues to be allowed, even if the subsidiary company ceases to exist under a qualifying amalgamation. This is provided the companies were in the same group immediately before the amalgamation. There is a limitation if group status between the borrower and the subsidiary ceases. The provisions on group companies cease to apply as from the income year group status ends. Upon the cessation of group status, it is thought that the borrower would be entitled to rely on the provisions granting a company an automatic deduction for its interest expense. The position on interest deductibility is to be determined when each expense is incurred, and is not controlled by the circumstances at the time of the borrowing. See C of IR v Banks (1978) 3 NZTC 61,236 (CA).  In relation to earlier provisions, the Commissioner had issued public binding rulings confirming that the group company provisions applied to a borrowing to meet a call on unpaid shares and under a refinancing of a group purchase. See BR Pub 97/4 and BR Pub 97/5, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 9, No 5, May 1997. Section DB 8 is overridden for interest expenditure that is subject to apportionment under the new mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG. See ¶10-035. With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, s DB 8 is also overridden in relation to interest expenditure subject to subpart DE (Motor vehicle expenditure) if a company is a close company that has elected to apply that subpart instead of the FBT rules (see ¶10-710 and ¶21-070). Individuals and qualifying companies A person is allowed a deduction under s DB 6 for interest incurred. The deduction that is allowed overrides the capital limitation, but the general permission must still be satisfied. (See ¶10-021.) In Brown v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-089, the High Court confirmed that interest can only be deducted where it is incurred by the person and that there must be a sufficient connection between the expense and the income earning process for the nexus to be met. In that case, a trust borrowed money and on-lent it to the company through which the taxpayer, one of three directors of the company, practised as a chartered accountant. The taxpayer paid the interest charged to the trust. The court rejected the taxpayer’s claim that because he expected to be reimbursed there was a nexus with assessable income. The court held that there was no definitive commitment on the taxpayer to make the interest payments and the absence of any legal obligation to reimburse meant there was no nexus between the expenditure and the potential for assessable income by reimbursement. In PL Brown Farms v C of IR (2014) 26 NZTC ¶21-083, the High Court confirmed that whether there is a sufficient nexus between the income earning process and the interest deductions claimed by a  taxpayer is determined by considering the legal arrangements entered into, not by considering what other arrangements the parties might have entered into. In that case, the taxpayer company had onlent funds to other companies, which had purchased land now leased to the taxpayer. The taxpayer claimed deductions for interest paid to the bank on the money borrowed and on-lent. The court held that on the evidence of the arrangements entered into there was no nexus between the interest expense incurred by the taxpayer and the acquisition of land or the leasing of the land by the other companies and the deductions were denied. The provisions of s DB 9 apply to qualifying company shareholders who borrow money to acquire shares in the qualifying company. Such persons are not able to rely on ss DB 7 and DB 8 described above relating to a company. The operation of s DB 9 is explained at ¶19-085. A deduction may be available under the general permission if the borrowed moneys are expected to produce assessable income. It is not necessary that assessable income be received. On that basis, a deduction for interest continued to be available in relation to a borrowing raised to purchase shares that initially generated dividend income but this ceased when the company stopped being profitable. Throughout the period of the investment, the borrowed moneys were employed in the production of assessable income. See Stevens and Stevens v C of IR (1989) 11 NZTC 6,001. Case law and the Commissioner’s position A considerable body of case law developed under earlier provisions that allowed a deduction for interest payable on capital employed in the production of assessable income. In 1987 the statutory provisions were revised by adoption of wording replicating the general permission. There has been a tendency to continue to apply the test of use of the borrowed moneys, including consideration of the application of the funds and the outcome of the application. In Australia, the courts developed the alternative approach of looking at the purpose of the borrowing. See Spassked Pty Ltd v FC of T 2003 ATC 5099.  The principles on interest deductibility have also been given detailed consideration by the Commissioner in interpretation statement IS0082, “Interest Deductibility — Public Trustee v CIR”, issued in May 2006 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 6, July 2006 at 9). This interpretation statement replaced the part of the statement relating to the Public Trustee case that was published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 9, June 1992 at 14. In May 2007, the Commissioner released a series of public binding rulings on interest deductibility, applying the principles set down in the Australian decision of Roberts and Smith. These rulings were updated in 2010 and reissued in 2015 — see below. The circumstances in which interest may, or may not, be allowed as a deduction can be illustrated by reference to court decisions, the Commissioner’s statements and public rulings. The appropriate starting point is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Public Trustee v C of T [1938] NZLR 436, which influences many outcomes on interest deductibility. Public Trustee decision Public Trustee concerned an estate comprising assets that produced both assessable income and non-assessable income. The trustee had insufficient cash to pay the death duty levied on the estate and, rather than sell those assets producing assessable income, the trustee borrowed money to meet the duties. The Court of Appeal decided that: ▪ the trustee was not entitled to deduct the whole of the interest, because the borrowing was only partly used to produce assessable income ▪ there is no difference in principle between borrowing to acquire earning assets that produce assessable income and borrowing to retain assets that produce assessable income, because the latter leaves the assets producing income intact ▪ the interest expense of the estate should be apportioned, with only the interest relating to retention of the assets producing assessable income allowed as a deduction.  The decisive factor for the Court appears to have been the circumstance that the borrowing was incurred for the purpose of maintaining the income of the estate and preventing its reduction. That factor supported deductibility of the interest, even though the borrowed funds were merely used to pay a debt or charge. The Court of Appeal did not address the quantum of the apportionment. The parties had agreed that the apportionment would be in the same proportion that assets producing assessable income bore to total assets. Example 1: A farmer who borrowed to meet obligations under a relationship property settlement instead of selling assets that produced assessable income to raise the funds was allowed a deduction for the interest payable on the borrowing. The interest had a sufficient nexus to the income-producing activity. See Williams v C of IR (1988) 10 NZTC 5,078.  Borlase decision A taxpayer who owns a property used to earn rental income may borrow funds to purchase a second property for occupation by the taxpayer. Interest on the borrowing is prevented from deduction by the private limitation. The borrowing was used to purchase the residence. The receipt of assessable income from the first property is insufficient to prevent application of the limitation. The taxpayer in Borlase v C of IR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,261 accepted the application of that proposition, the issue in the case concerning the appropriate apportionment to allow for deduction of the interest payable on the taxpayer’s first property. Roberts and Smith decisions Interest on borrowings raised by a partnership to repay partnership working capital may be allowed as a deduction. That may be the case even though the repayment may be used by a partner to fund private expenditure. The character of the refinancing is the same as the original borrowing, which was that of the provision of working capital, the case being no different in principle from a borrowing from  one bank to replace working capital originally borrowed from another lender. It was held that the interest was deductible even though the borrowed funds were not used directly in deriving income. Capital contributions, past years’ profits and debt were all considered capable of being replaced in that way. See FC of T v JD Roberts, FC of T v Smith 92 ATC 4380. In May 2007, the Commissioner issued a series of public binding rulings applying the principles set down in the Australian decision Roberts and Smith (see above) to the deductibility of interest under s DB 6. The Commissioner issued an updated set of rulings in 2010 and reissued them in 2015 as BR Pub 15/04 to BR Pub 15/09 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 27, No 5, June 2015 at 3). The case and the rulings only apply where the amount replaced and repaid is owed to a person separate to the business, like a shareholder of a company or a partner in a partnership. The rulings do not apply to sole traders. For the rulings relating to partnerships, BR Pub 15/04 and BR Pub 15/05, see ¶23-136. ▪ In public ruling BR Pub 15/06, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed by a company to repurchase shares”, the Commissioner allows a deduction for interest in respect of funds used by a company to repurchase shares (including some bonus issue shares) to the extent that the funds that were represented by the shares and returned to the shareholders were funds contributed by the shareholders and used directly in the company’s business, or used to repay borrowed funds on which the interest was deductible. The interest is not deductible to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the company to pay current year income to a shareholder, or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. ▪ In public ruling BR Pub 15/07, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed by a company to pay dividends”, the Commissioner allows a company a deduction for interest in respect of funds used by the company to pay dividends from past year profits or contributed capital to its shareholders. The interest will not be  deductible to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the company to pay current year income to a shareholder or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. ▪ In public ruling BR Pub 15/08, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed to repay debt”, the Commissioner allows a deduction for a taxpayer or a partnership for interest on funds used to repay borrowed funds to the person who invested those funds in the taxpayer or partnership in certain specified circumstances. ▪ In public ruling BR Pub 15/09, “Interest deductibility — funds borrowed to make a payment to a group company under section IC 5”, the Commissioner clarifies that no interest deduction will be available under s DB 6 by applying the Roberts and Smith principle where funds are borrowed by a company to make a subvention payment. It is not a replacement of an amount previously advanced. (Usually a company making a subvention payment from borrowed funds is entitled to an interest deduction under s DB 7.) For more on subvention payments see ¶18-060. Pacific Rendezvous Ltd decision The objective of receipt of a capital gain from the eventual sale of an investment purchased with borrowed funds is likely to be present in many equity and property investments. The purpose of achieving a capital gain is unlikely, of itself, to prevent or reduce the deduction allowed for the interest paid on the borrowing. This is on the assumption that the investor also seeks the receipt of dividend or rental income. Pacific Rendezvous Ltd v C of IR (1986) 8 NZTC 5,146 (CA) concerned a motelier that wished to sell its assets. Pending sale, funds were borrowed to extend and refurbish the assets, and a sale programme was embarked on that took seven years. The capital purpose — ie of realising capital gain on sale — was the main purpose, with the income purpose of increased revenue a secondary one. The taxpayer claimed a deduction for the two-thirds of its interest expense, but the Commissioner limited the deduction to  25%. The Court of Appeal decided that in principle all of the interest was deductible. The statutory test of a borrowing employed in the production of assessable income was satisfied. All of the borrowings were put into the additions and improvements, so that the borrowings contributed significantly to producing assessable income. Although capital appreciation was a major consideration in the raising of the borrowing, that did not prevent the capital being employed in the generation of additional assessable income. Brierley decision C of IR v Brierley (1990) 12 NZTC 7,184 (CA) concerned an individual who claimed interest deductions totalling $325,000 in relation to borrowings raised to acquire shares in a listed company. Most of the returns from the company were in the form of nonassessable receipts, the taxpayer receiving distributions that were not dividends totalling $451,000 and dividends totalling $15,000. The Court of Appeal held that the interest paid was allowed as a deduction in full. The loan capital was used in the production of assessable income in current or future income years. It was not necessary that assessable income had to be actually received. On the authority of Pacific Rendezvous, the purpose of achieving a capital appreciation from the investment did not justify an apportionment of the interest expense. Example 2: An individual borrows $10,000 at 10% pa to finance a purchase of shares in a company. No dividend is paid in the five income years following the purchase of the shares. The taxpayer pays interest on the loan in each of the five income years. Is the interest deductible? The individual can deduct the interest in full in each of the five income years, because the capital is used in each year in gaining or producing assessable income. Even though the company paid no dividends, the interest will be deductible provided the company has no restrictions in its constitution preventing the payment of dividends in the future. The interest is deductible as long as the shares are expected to earn assessable income. There is no requirement that assessable income be produced in the year in which the interest deduction is claimed. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 9, June 1992 at 16.  An investor may enter into an equity or property investment on a “negatively geared” basis, that is, at least in the early stage of the investment, dividend or rental income from the investment will be exceeded by costs such as the interest expense on borrowings raised to purchase the investment. It is likely that the interest expense will be allowed as a deduction in full. Eggers decision Eggers v C of IR (1988) 10 NZTC 5,153 (CA) concerned a taxpayer approaching retirement who purchased a farm property with a view to its eventual development into a profitable farming venture. To defray expenses, part of the property was leased out. The Court of Appeal rejected the Commissioner’s approach of limiting the deduction for expenses inclusive of interest to the amount of rents received. The borrowed capital was fully committed to the income-earning process, there being no other use to which the land was put. The borrowing would produce assessable income in current and future income years. Example 3: A taxpayer borrows a substantial amount of money and uses it to buy a house for investment as part of a retirement plan. The house is rented at a market rental but the interest exceeds the rental income earned. Can the taxpayer deduct the interest? The interest is fully deductible in every year that the property is let or is available for letting. The taxpayer’s possible intention to make a capital gain from the house does not affect the deductibility. The interest deduction is not limited to the amount of income earned. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 9, June 1992 at 16.  Interest paid on borrowing to pay tax The Commissioner has addressed the question of whether a deduction is allowed for interest paid on a borrowing raised to pay income tax. The view taken was that no deduction is available. Example 4:  (A) An individual who is not in business has an end of year tax liability. He borrows to pay the tax. His assets are a house and a car. Is the interest deductible? The interest is not deductible, because there is no nexus with the gaining or producing of assessable income. (B) The same taxpayer has investments in Government stock. Rather than realise the investments, he borrows to meet the tax expenditure. Is the interest deductible? The interest is deductible to the extent that it is payable in meeting an involuntary tax expenditure and preserving income-producing assets that would have been realised if the taxpayer had not borrowed. To the extent that the interest is paid to preserve nonincome producing assets, it will not be deductible. Apportionment of the interest will depend on the facts of each case. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 3, No 9, June 1992 at 17, and para 3 of Pt 1 of the interpretation statement IS0082, “Interest Deductibility — Public Trustee v CIR”.  Borrowing and on-lending There has been some discussion by the courts of the question of whether a taxpayer is allowed a deduction in full for interest paid on a loan that is on-lent at a lower rate of interest. For an individual who borrows and on-lends at a lower rate of interest, the private limitation may potentially be of application. In one case, it was found that the on-lending to a spouse and a family company to repay a loan over the family residence operated to limit the deduction allowed for the interest of 12.5% paid on the borrowing to the interest of 1% received under the on-lending arrangement. See Ure v FC of T 81 ATC 4100. A deduction in full may be easier to support in a commercial context. Interest on a borrowing raised for on-lending to a subsidiary company in order to promote the receipt of dividend income from the subsidiary may be allowed as a deduction in full. See FC of T v Total Holdings (Australia) Pty Ltd 79 ATC 4279. Deduction when income-producing activities have ceased A deduction may continue to be available even though incomeproducing activities have ceased. Funds borrowed to purchase a business that is later sold for an amount insufficient to repay the loan may continue to support an interest deduction after sale of the business. The loan had been raised in a transaction of purchase entered into for the purpose of producing assessable income. It was  irrelevant that the lender might, as a matter of practicality, have allowed early repayment of the loan upon sale of the business. See FC of T v Brown 99 ATC 4852. A refinancing of the business loan may continue to give rise to a deduction for interest even though the refinancing occurs after cessation of the business. See FC of T v Jones 2002 ATC 4135. It is important to note that cases of this nature are heavily dependent on its own unique set of facts, and may be of limited relevance in New Zealand. The approach taken in these cases was to look at the reason for the borrowing or the occasion that gave rise to the borrowing. This differs from the Commissioner’s view that looks at the use that the funds are put to at the time that the interest is incurred. For the deductibility of break fees on the repayment of a loan see ¶10-190. Use of money interest A taxpayer is permitted a deduction for use of money interest incurred on underpaid tax: s DB 3B. Section EF 5 provides that use of money interest is deductible in the income year in which it is paid. Breaking term deposits In December 2010 Inland Revenue issued public binding ruling BR Pub 10/21, “Interest repayments required as a result of the early repayment of a financial arrangement — deductibility”, and in September 2014 the ruling was reissued as BR Pub 14/07 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 10, November 2014, at 3). The binding ruling applies to situations where a person places an amount of money on term deposit. The term deposit contract provides that the rate of interest payable will be reduced on any early withdrawal. As a result of either a full or partial withdrawal of funds, the reduced interest rate requires the repayment of interest already derived by the depositor, or set-off of interest owed against the principal sum. A term deposit is a financial arrangement, subject to the financial arrangements rules. (See ¶6-045.) The ruling differentiates between full withdrawal of the term deposit and partial withdrawal of the term deposit.  Full withdrawal of term deposit Where the person withdraws the full amount of the term deposit before the maturity date the following applies: ▪ A base price adjustment (BPA) is required (see ¶6-360) and the amount of repaid interest is included in the “consideration” element of the BPA. ▪ Where the BPA gives rise to a negative amount, that amount is expenditure incurred under the financial arrangement rules and is treated as interest. ▪ A deduction may be available under s DB 6 or DB 7. ▪ An automatic deduction is allowed under s DB 11 to the extent that the amount arises from assessable income derived by the person under the financial arrangement in earlier income years (see ¶10-452). Partial withdrawal of term deposit Where the person withdraws part of the amount of the term deposit before the maturity date of the term deposit contract the following applies: ▪ No BPA is required. ▪ Depositors who are not cash basis persons (see ¶6-120) and cash basis persons who have elected to adopt a spreading method must apply Determination G25: “Variations in the Terms of a Financial Arrangement” when the term is varied by partial withdrawal. The repaid interest is included in the calculation under the determination and an adjustment is made in the year of variation. ▪ Depositors who are cash basis persons may deduct the repaid interest at the time it is incurred only if the general permission under s DA 1 is satisfied. The Commissioner considers the relationship between repayment of interest and the earning of  interest under a term deposit insufficient to satisfy the requirements of s DA 1(1)(a). However, a deduction may be available under s DA 1(1)(b) if it can be shown that the expenditure was incurred in the course of carrying on a business. ▪ If the amount of repaid interest is not deductible at the time of repayment, it must be dealt with on maturity of the term deposit through a BPA, and is included in both the “consideration” and “expenditure” elements of the BPA. ▪ If the BPA gives rise to a positive amount, that amount is treated as income derived, except to the extent to which it arises from expenditure incurred in earlier income years and for which a deduction was denied. ▪ Therefore, a positive BPA amount in the final year of the term deposit will be reduced by the amount of interest paid in the year the partial withdrawal took place. BR Pub 14/07 applies indefinitely from 17 December 2013. Before that, BR Pub 10/21 applied for the period from 16 December 2010 to 16 December 2013. Law: IT07 ss DB 3, DB 6–DB 9, EF 5  ¶10-655 Deductibility of interruption expenditure A special rule allows certain ongoing expenses incurred by taxpayers affected by the Christchurch earthquakes to be deductible. In the absence of the special provision (s DZ 20), ongoing expenditure incurred by businesses interrupted by the Christchurch earthquakes may not be deductible, such expenditure not being able to satisfy the general permission. Section DZ 20 applies where: ▪ a person has an income-earning activity in greater Christchurch (as defined in s 4 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011 (which definition continues to apply as it did immediately  before its repeal by the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016)) immediately before a Canterbury earthquake, and ▪ the activity is interrupted for a period (period of interruption) as a result of the earthquake, and ▪ the person incurs expenditure during the period of interruption in meeting an obligation in relation to the income-earning activity that would otherwise have been deductible to the taxpayer had the earthquakes not occurred, and ▪ the person resumes the income-earning activity before the 2024– 25 income year. If all of the above requirements are met, expenditure incurred during the period of interruption will be deductible. The deduction is available in the income year in which the person resumes the income-earning activity. Section DZ 20 applies from the 2010–11 to 2023–24 income years. Example: Gavin owns a residential rental property in Christchurch that was damaged by the Canterbury earthquakes and, as a result, has been demolished. A replacement residential property will be completed and available for rental in 12 months. Although the property ceased to be rented as a result of the earthquakes, Gavin has continued to incur rates and interest expenditure in respect of the property. Before the earthquakes, Gavin was entitled to claim a deduction for the rates and interest. Gavin wants to know whether the rates and interest incurred while the property is untenanted will be deductible for income tax purposes. The rates and interest will be deductible provided that Gavin resumes deriving rental income before the 2024–25 income year. Therefore, Gavin will be entitled to a deduction for the ongoing rates and interest expenditure because his replacement property will be built and available for rental in 12 months. The deduction will be available in the income year in which he resumes renting out the property.  Law: IT07 s DZ 20  ¶10-660 Deductibility of revenue account property and investment losses There are specific provisions in the Act for the deductibility and timing of deductions for revenue account property. Briefly, revenue account property is a person’s trading stock or property that would produce income for the person if the property was disposed of. Examples include items disposed of that give rise to income in accordance with any of ss CB 3 (Profit-making undertaking or scheme; see ¶5-192), CB 4 (Personal property acquired for purpose of disposal; see ¶5-197) or CB 5 (Business of dealing in personal property; see ¶5-211). Revenue account property may also include land (see Chapter 7). Events that are treated as a disposal for depreciation purposes are specifically excluded from the definition of revenue account property. The general permission may authorise the deduction for any loss suffered upon the disposal of an equity or property investment held on revenue account. The position in relation to a debt investment is dealt with by the financial arrangements rules. A deduction is allowed for a loss arising upon the sale of shares acquired with the purpose of resale. See C of IR v Inglis (1992) 14 NZTC 9,180 (CA). This is provided that the purpose of resale is the dominant purpose. See Case W2 (2003) 21 NZTC 11,003 (land) and Case V5 (2001) 20 NZTC 10,055 (shares). Similarly, in relation to the loss arising upon the sale of shares acquired in the conduct of a business of dealing in shares. See C of IR v Stockwell (1992) 14 NZTC 9,190 (CA). These decisions are effectively confirmed by s DB 23. Section DB 23 provides for a specific deduction for the cost of revenue account property. This provision overrides the capital limitation. The general permission (see ¶10-016) must still be satisfied and the other general limitations still apply (see ¶10-071). ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to clarify that the cost of  revenue account property is deductible even if it was not known when the costs were incurred that the property would be subject to tax on sale, or if the property was used privately while it was held. Note that this is most relevant in the context of land (see ¶7-360). The proposed amendment provides that s DB 23 supplements the general permission and overrides the capital limitation and the private limitation. The amendment is intended to apply retrospectively from 1 April 2008, the commencement date of the Income Tax Act 2007. Problems of valuation may arise when only a part of the property purchased is disposed of. To calculate the person’s net income, the cost of the property to the person of that part must first be ascertained. Certain investment shares No deduction is permitted when any of ss CX 55, CX 56B or CX 56C apply upon the disposal of the revenue account property. These provisions concern portfolio investment income and the objective is to prevent revenue account investors claiming deductions for the cost of an investment when they are not taxable on its proceeds. See s DB 23(2) and Tax Information Bulletin Vol 23, No 8, October 2011, at 83. Timing of deductions The timing of the deduction for certain types of revenue account property is provided for in s EA 2(2). This section provides that the deduction is allocated to the earlier of: ▪ the income year in which the person disposes of the property, and ▪ the income year in which the property ceases to exist. This timing rule does not apply to revenue account property that is: ▪ trading stock valued under subpart EB (Valuation of trading stock (including dealers’ livestock))  ▪ livestock valued under subpart EC (Valuation of livestock) ▪ an excepted financial arrangement valued under subpart ED (Valuation of excepted financial arrangements) ▪ a film or a film right to which ss EJ 4–EJ 8 (which relate to films) apply ▪ property that arises as a result of petroleum development expenditure or petroleum exploration expenditure to which ss EJ 12–EJ 20 (which relate to petroleum mining) apply ▪ property that arises as a result of mining development expenditure or mining exploration expenditure to which ss EJ 20B–EJ 20E (which relate to mineral mining) apply ▪ property fitted to an aircraft engine as part of an aircraft engine overhaul to which s DW 5 applies ▪ a specified lease or a lease to which s EJ 10 (Personal property lease payments) applies, and ▪ a financial arrangement valued under subpart EW (Financial arrangements rules). Profit-making undertaking or scheme When a person derives income under s CB 3 (Profit-making undertaking or scheme) and the amount is not income under any other provision, s DB 26 provides for a deduction for the value of the property. To ensure that only increases in value of the property since the beginning of the undertaking or scheme will be subject to tax, the amount of the deduction allowed is determined by treating the person as: ▪ having disposed of the property to an unrelated third party immediately before the start of the undertaking or scheme, and  ▪ having reacquired the property immediately after the start of the undertaking or scheme at the market value of the property at that time. Section DB 26 supplements the general permission. The general limitations still apply. If only part of the property purchased is used in the profit-making undertaking or scheme, the market value of that part immediately before and immediately after the time at which the undertaking or scheme began must be determined. The valuation must relate to the property in its existing form at those particular points in time. This may be difficult in practice. Deductions under share-lending arrangements No deduction is allowed for the amount of expenditure incurred as share-lending collateral under a share-lending arrangement. See s DB 16. However, under s DB 17 a deduction is allowed for the amount of any replacement payment and the amount of any imputation credits under ss OB 64 and RE 25 attached to a replacement payment under a share-lending arrangement. See further ¶5-288 and ¶17116. Share losses and grouping A specific prohibition on the deduction of a loss suffered on an equity investment is contained in s DB 24. This situation arises when the funds acquired to subscribe for the shares generate a loss for the share-issuing company, or another company, which is subject to a group offset by the subscribing company or another company in its corporate group. The equity loss arising upon disposal of the shares, or through their decline in value, is not allowed as a deduction to the extent of the loss that has been grouped. Certain intra-group transactions An anomaly previously existed whereby a member of a consolidated group was entitled to a deduction for the cost of purchasing shares or other excepted financial arrangements as revenue account  property in a company outside the group that subsequently joined the group, thus cancelling the shares. The holder was still entitled to a deduction for the cost of the shares, but the amount derived from the cancellation was excluded income under the consolidation regime. Section DB 23B now denies the holder a deduction for the cost of the revenue account shares that cease to exist in that year as a result of a transaction or arrangement between two members of a consolidated group. Where the shares are cancelled in the year they are acquired, the deduction denied is the expenditure incurred as the cost of revenue account property. When the shares are cancelled in a subsequent year, the deduction denied is the value of the shares at the end of the previous income year calculated at their cost price. Law: IT07 ss DB 16, DB 17, DB 23, DB 23B, DB 24, DB 26, EA 2(2)  ¶10-670 Deductibility of lease expenses A deduction is allowed for expenditure incurred in the preparation and registration of a lease of property. A deduction is also allowed for expenditure incurred in the renewal of a lease of property. The deduction that is allowed overrides the capital limitation. It is still necessary to satisfy the general permission, meaning that the leased property must be part of activities expected to produce assessable income. Interpretation statement “Easements — deductibility of the costs of preparation, stamping and registration”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 14, No 9, September 2002 at 30, confirms that an easement is a lease for the purposes of s DB 18. Lease inducement payments Lease inducement payments are deductible to the payer under s DB 20B if the following conditions are met:  ▪ a person (the payer) incurs an amount of expenditure as consideration for the agreement by another person (the payee) to the grant, renewal, extension or transfer of a right (the land right) that is a leasehold estate not including a perpetual right of renewal (eg Glasgow-type leases), or is a licence to use land ▪ the payer is the person who owns the land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted, and ▪ the payee is the person who is obtaining the land right. The deduction provision allows deductions for various forms of lease inducements, in particular, contributions for fit-out costs. A timing rule in s EI 4B applies to these payments. Section DB 20B overrides the capital limitation, but the general permission in s DA 1 must still be satisfied and the other general limitations still apply. Timing rule The timing rule in s EI 4B spreads the amount of the deduction under s DB 20B over the “spreading period”. The “spreading period” means a period that: ▪ begins with the commencement, or a renewal or extension, of the land right, and ▪ ends before the earliest following date on which the land right may be terminated, or may expire, if not extended or renewed. Thus, the spreading period is an initial fixed period determined at the grant, renewal or extension of the land right. If, later, there is a payment for a further renewal or extension of the land right, that payment would be spread over the new fixed renewal or extension period, as that period is regarded as a separate spreading period. Example 1:  A landlord and a tenant enter into a five-year lease, which includes two five-year renewal rights. The lease commences on 1 April 2013. On the same day, the tenant receives a lease inducement payment from the landlord. The spreading period of the lease inducement payment, which is subject to ss CC 1B and DB 20B, is from 1 April 2013 (being the commencement date of the lease) to 31 March 2018 (being the earliest following date on which the lease expires).  Example 2: Following on from the above example, in March 2018, the tenant decides to renew the lease for another five years (from 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2023). In January 2022, there is an oversupply of leases in the market. The tenant wants to move to other premises for a lower rent. Knowing this, the landlord makes a lease inducement payment to the tenant for the renewal of the lease for another five years (from 1 April 2023 to 31 March 2028). The tenant renews the lease for another five years. The spreading period of the second lease inducement payment is from 1 April 2023 (being the commencement date of the second renewal period) to 31 March 2028 (being the earliest following date on which the lease expires). Although the payment was made in January 2022, the landlord incurs the payment in relation to the second renewal period of the lease. Examples from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 9, October 2013 at 28.  Where the expenditure is incurred before the end of the spreading period, the amount of the deduction is allocated proportionately on a monthly basis over the remainder of the spreading period. As in most cases the lease inducement payment will be paid before the commencement of the spreading period, the deduction for the payment will generally be spread over the entire spreading period. Note that even if the payment is made well before the spreading period commences, the deduction for the amount will be spread over the spreading period, and not when the amount is incurred. Where the expenditure is incurred at or after the end of the spreading period, then the amount is allocated to the income year in which it is incurred. If the spreading period is more than 50 years, the amount is allocated evenly over the first 50 income years. Exception to timing rule  If a person ceases to hold the relevant land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted part way through the spreading period, an exception to the new timing rules applies, allowing for a “wash-up” calculation. For deductions, if there is a remaining amount to be allocated under the main spreading provision in s EI 4B(3), the amount of those deductions is allocated to an income year (the balance year) ending before the end of the spreading period if: ▪ at the beginning of the balance year, either or both the land right and the estate in land from which the land right is granted are held by the person or an associated person, and ▪ at the end of the balance year, neither of the land right and the estate in land from which the land right is granted are held by the person or an associated person (s EI 4B(5)). Note that if the land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted is transferred to an associated person, no “wash-up” calculation for deductions is allowed. The remaining amount of deductions continues to be allocated over the spreading period under s EI 4B(3). This ensures the timing of deductions cannot be accelerated by transferring the land right or the estate in land from which the land right is granted to an associated person. A “wash-up” calculation does exist for landlords (that is, lessors and sub-lessors) under s EI 4B(5B). This allows landlords to receive the balance of deductions for a lease inducement payment if the lease is terminated early. Lease surrender payments Section DB 20C provides that lease surrender payments are deductible to a person (the payer) if the following conditions are met: ▪ the payer incurs an amount of expenditure as consideration for the agreement by another person (the payee) to the surrender or termination of a right (the land right) that is a leasehold estate not including a perpetual right of renewal (eg Glasgow-type leases) or is a licence to use land  ▪ the payer is a person who owns the land right or a person who owns the estate in land from which the land right is granted, and ▪ the payee is a person who owns the estate in land from which the land right is granted, or a person who owns the land right. Section DB 20C overrides the capital limitation in s DA 2(1). The general permission in s DA 1 must still be satisfied and the other general limitations in s DA 2 still apply. There is no specific timing rule for lease surrender payments. Therefore, the general provisions of the Income Tax Act apply. Generally this means lease surrender payments will be deductible in the income year in which they are incurred. Lessee’s covenant to repair damages A lessee may be allowed a deduction under s DB 21 for any amount paid to the lessor for a failure to observe a covenant in the lease to maintain or repair improvements on the land. The deduction allowed is to the extent that a deduction would have been available for the maintenance or repairs if the lessee had observed the covenant. The deduction is allowed in the year of payment or one or more of the prior three income years. See s EJ 11. Lessor’s repair expenses A lessor who receives compensation for a tenant’s breach of a covenant to maintain or repair the premises after leasing has ceased may be allowed a deduction under s DB 22 for expenditure of a revenue nature on maintenance or the repair of improvements. The effect is that assessment of the compensation receipt will be reduced to the extent that it is applied to meet restoration costs of a revenue nature. Law: IT07 ss DB 18, DB 20B, DB 20C, DB 21, DB 22, EI 4B, EJ 11  ¶10-675 Deductibility of lease payments — operating leases  Leases entered into on or after 20 May 1999 that are not finance leases are known as operating leases. Deduction to lessee under operating lease The lessee under an operating lease (ie a lease for personal property entered into on or after 20 May 1999 that is not a finance lease) is entitled to a deduction for lease payments made under the lease. The allowable deduction is calculated in accordance with s EJ 10. Example: On 1 October 2012, TP Ltd entered into a five-year lease agreement for an item of plant. The lease provided for an immediate deposit of $10,000 and thereafter monthly payments of $420.36, so that total rent payments under the lease were $35,222. The deduction available for the lease payments during the term of the lease would be calculated applying the following formula: (part of lease term within income year ÷ lease term) × sum of lease payment $ 31 March 2013  6/60 × $35,222 =  3,522.20  31 March 2014  12/60 × $35,222 =  7,044.40  31 March 2015  12/60 × $35,222 =  7,044.40  31 March 2016  12/60 × $35,222 =  7,044.40  31 March 2017  12/60 × $35,222 =  7,044.40  31 March 2018  6/60 × $35,222 =  3,522.20  Total lease payments  35,222.00  Special depreciation rules applied for operating leases entered into before 20 June 2007 that were re-classified as finance leases under the overseas lease rules — see ¶6-700. ▸Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes changes that are the result of the replacement of the previous accounting standard for leases, New Zealand Equivalent to International Accounting Standard 17 Leases  (NZ IAS 17), with New Zealand Equivalent to International Financial Reporting Standard 16 Leases (NZ IFRS 16). The changes will allow taxpayers who apply NZ IFRS 16 to more closely follow their accounting treatment of leases for tax purposes. NZ IFRS 16 applies to income years starting on or after 1 January 2019. Under NZ IAS 17, there was a difference in the accounting treatment for operating and finance leases for both lessors and lessees. For lessees, NZ IFRS 16 removes the distinction between operating and finance leases for accounting purposes. Under NZ IFRS 16, lessees are required to include all leases on their balance sheet by recognising both an asset, being the right to use the leased asset for the lease term, and a lease liability, representing the obligation to pay rentals. NZ IFRS 16 also changes the timing of accounting expenditure for lessees compared to the previous treatment, but total deductions are unchanged over the life of the lease. The Bill proposes to allow lessees who use NZ IFRS 16 a one-off choice to follow their accounting treatment for tax. Income and expenditure arising from a lease will be calculated under proposed new s EJ 10B, which will apply only if the taxpayer elects to apply NZ IFRS 16 for tax. Expenditure will be deductible under proposed s DB 51C and income will be assessable under proposed s CC 14. Most amounts calculated under s EJ 10B are expected to be expenditure, but income can arise in some circumstances, such as when an impairment adjustment from a previous year is reversed through profit and loss for accounting purposes. NZ IFRS 16 is proposed to apply for tax purposes to a person’s operating lease of a personal property lease asset (the IFRS lease), as lessee, if: ▪ the person, as lessee, uses NZ IFRS 16 for accounting or would use NZ IFRS 16 if that lease met the materiality thresholds for NZ IFRS 16 ▪ the person irrevocably chooses to use the new provision  ▪ the lessor and lessee are not associated, and ▪ the asset is not subleased to another person. NZ IFRS 16 spreads certain lease expenditure, including provisions, in a way that results in the timing of recognition of this expenditure for accounting purposes being significantly different to when it would be incurred for tax purposes. Proposed s EJ 10B(2) to (4) require adjustments to ensure this expenditure is deductible for tax at a similar time to when it would be deductible for a taxpayer not applying NZ IFRS 16 for tax. When an IFRS lease ends, either because the lease itself ends or because it no longer qualifies to be an IFRS lease, proposed s EJ 10B(5) and (6) require a wash-up to ensure that total deductions over the term of the lease match those that would have been deductible for a taxpayer not applying NZ IFRS 16 for tax. Proposed s EJ 10B(7) and (8) include transitional adjustments for certain leases when NZ IFRS 16 applies for tax after the original start of the lease. This can arise in the year a taxpayer first chooses to apply NZ IFRS 16 for tax, or in a later year for an individual lease that did not meet the IFRS lease requirements but subsequently does. The proposed amendments are intended to apply for balance dates starting on or after 1 January 2019, to align with the application date of NZ IFRS 16. Law: IT07 ss EJ 10, YA 1  ¶10-680 Deductibility of legal expenses Under s DB 62, a person can deduct business-related legal expenditure when their total legal expenses incurred in an income year are $10,000 or less. The section specifically overrides the capital limitation, but the general permission must still be satisfied and the other general limitations (such as the private limitation) still apply. For the purposes of this provision, legal expenses are fees for  legal services rendered by a person who holds a practising certificate issued by the New Zealand Law Society or an Australian equivalent only. If the legal expenses do not meet this definition or the total legal expenses for the income year exceed $10,000, then the ordinary rules relating to deductibility of legal expenses apply. Other specific provisions may authorise the deduction of certain legal expenses incurred by a business. Examples are the provisions allowing a deduction for borrowing costs, lease preparation expenses and tax return expenses. Outside of the specific provisions, the question usually will be whether the expenses are allowed as a deduction under the general permission and not excluded from deduction by the capital limitation. The limited deduction in s DB 62 is an exception to the capital limitation. Ordinarily the capital limitation can be expected to apply to prevent the deduction of the legal expenses of a business. Lawyers are often retained to assist in transactions involving the acquisition or disposal of significant business assets. The character of a transaction of that kind for the business can be expected to confer a capital complexion on the legal fees incurred by the client. It is also the case that a business may retain a lawyer to assist with activities that are part of normal business operations. Examples may be lawyers retained to advise on contracts with customers and employees, to advise on applicable statutory regulatory regimes and to assist with the collection of debts. The context of the conduct of usual trading activities suggests that the legal expenses may have the character of expenditure of a revenue nature. Case examples of deductions allowed for legal expenses Case examples that have allowed a deduction for the legal expenses incurred by a business include legal fees on the following matters: ▪ recovery of loss of profits for the supply of defective plant (but not compensation for the plant itself): Omihi Lime Co Ltd v C of IR [1964] NZLR 731 ▪ contesting competitors’ patent applications conflicting with the taxpayer’s own patent: C of IR v Murray Equipment Ltd [1966]  NZLR 360 ▪ protection of the trade secrets of the business: FC of T v Consolidated Fertilisers Ltd 91 ATC 4677 ▪ opposition to the extension of a competitor’s patent: Hallstroms Pty Ltd v FC of T (1946) 72 CLR 634 ▪ defending an allegation of an infringement of copyright: Central Broadcasters Ltd v FC of T (1934) 2 ATD 434 ▪ proceedings involving a moneylender that alleged a breach of a moneylending contract: IT Commrs (Bihar and Orissa) v Singh [1942] 1 All ER 362 ▪ proceedings to defend proposed amendments to the company’s charter (constitution) to enhance the ability to borrow: Commrs of IR v Carron Co (1968) 45 TC 18 ▪ defending criminal charges, brought against the company’s directors, alleging that the company’s selling methods resulted in the payment of secret commissions: Magna Alloys & Research Pty Ltd v FC of T 80 ATC 4542 ▪ defending libel claims brought against a newspaper publisher: Herald and Weekly Times Ltd v FC of T (1932) 48 CLR 113 ▪ a professional director defending allegations of negligence and breach of duty: Cox v C of IR (1992) 14 NZTC 9,164 ▪ a stockbroker defending an alleged breach of stock exchange regulations in professional disciplinary proceedings: McKnight (HMIT) v Sheppard [1999] BTC 236 ▪ an accountant defending an allegation of conspiracy to defraud the Government: Putnin v FC of T 91 ATC 4087 ▪ obtaining advice on whether goods had been imported in breach of Customs legislation: Nicholas Nathan Ltd v C of IR (1989) 11  NZTC 6,213 ▪ defending title to a company asset in opposition to a claimant with no title: Southern v Borax Consolidated Ltd (1940) 23 TC 597 ▪ a medical practitioner defending criminal proceedings alleging the obtaining of property by deception in the course of conduct of the practice: Elberg v FC of T 98 ATC 4454 ▪ arbitration proceedings following attempts to forcibly retire the taxpayer as a partner in a legal practice: Creer v FC of T 94 ATC 4454 ▪ repurchase of the interests of retiring partners withdrawing from a property development syndicate: Sarich v FC of T 78 ATC 4646. Commissioner’s practice The Commissioner’s practice is to allow a deduction for legal expenses incurred in connection with the following matters: ▪ expenses of defending breaches of the law committed by an employee ▪ costs of removing an obstacle to trading or safeguarding or preserving an existing business ▪ costs incurred in attempting to recover any sum which would be assessable income if received (eg collection of book debts) ▪ expenses incurred in attempting to abate expenditure that would be deductible ▪ expenses incurred by an employee while “on the job” for infringement of traffic or other regulations unless the employer is implicated in the illegal acts of the employee or the employee was not engaged in carrying on the lawful business of the employer, and  ▪ costs incurred in appointing company directors and the company’s legal advisers. Case examples of deductions disallowed for legal expenses Case examples that have not allowed a deduction for the legal costs incurred by a business include the following: ▪ proceedings to contest the imposition of dumping duty following the importation of a tugboat: Auckland Harbour Board v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,826 ▪ proceedings commenced against a local authority and a competitor in relation to a contract awarded by the authority that would have created a new and significant revenue stream: C of IR v Fullers Bay of Islands Ltd (2004) 21 NZTC 18,834. The decision of the High Court was affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Fullers Bay of Islands Ltd v C of IR (2006) 22 NZTC 19,716 ▪ proceedings by a service station operator to prevent an oil company terminating the operator’s lease and supply agreement for petroleum products: W Wehbe Pty Ltd v FC of T 93 ATC 5015 ▪ proceedings disputing the closure of uneconomic branches of the business: Foley Bros Pty Ltd v FC of T (1965) 13 ATD 562 ▪ takeover proceedings against a competitor also seeking to acquire the shares of a third company: John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd v FC of T (1959) 101 CLR 30 ▪ settlement of a dispute concerning profit entitlements from a business: IR Commrs v Appuhamy [1963] 1 All ER 69 ▪ proceedings to contest the issue of a business licence to a competitor: Broken Hill Theatres Pty Ltd v FC of T (1952) 85 CLR 423  ▪ proceedings instituted by a pharmaceutical company seeking to prevent competitors obtaining approval to market competing products: Smithkline Beecham Laboratories (Australia) Ltd v FC of T 93 ATC 4629 ▪ a farmer resisting compulsory acquisition of the farm property and disputing the amount of compensation: Pye v FC of T (1959) 12 ATD 118 ▪ obtaining resource consent for the relocation of a farm machinery business: Case T53 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,404 ▪ proceedings taken by a taxpayer in respect of a derivative action: Case 13/2016 (2016) 27 NZTC ¶3-035. Commissioner’s practice The Commissioner has indicated that no deduction is allowed for legal expenses incurred in connection with the following matters: ▪ expenses incurred in the sale of a business (although any cost incurred in connection with valuing the trading stock may be deductible) ▪ expenses incurred in incorporating or liquidating a company (this also includes costs incurred in altering the capital structure of a company) ▪ the cost of drawing up a partnership deed or deed of trust, and ▪ the cost of settling any dispute between the partners. Law: IT07 s DB 62  ¶10-690 Deductibility of management fees The tests for determining deductibility of management fees paid by members of group companies are clarified by the High Court decision of Lockwood Buildings Ltd v C of IR (1996) 17 NZTC  12,483. The case concerned the payment of a management fee by a subsidiary to its holding company for managerial services. Part of the fee related to costs incurred by the holding company for a feasibility study relating to investment in the forestry industry. The costs were then recharged to the subsidiary as part of the management fee. It was this portion of the management fee that the Commissioner sought to deny on the grounds that it related to capital expenditure incurred by the parent. Williams J found that on the facts of the case the management fee was deductible in full. In reaching his decision, Williams J gave emphasis to the following points. First, in deciding whether the fees were deductible, it was necessary to look at the payment from the payer’s point of view. The management fees in this case were deductible to the subsidiary under ordinary principles, irrespective of the nature of the expenditure incurred by the parent in providing the services. Williams J further held that the relationship between the parties was of no consequence. In this instance the subsidiary paid one lump sum for management services each year and it was immaterial to the subsidiary how the fee was comprised provided it obtained the services required to operate. Secondly, it then became a question of fact whether the payment was actually capital in nature. On the facts in this case it was held that the management fee was deductible, being paid on revenue account. The following factors were significant in coming to this conclusion: ▪ the subsidiary had divested itself of any ability to manage its operations, preferring to acquire those services from an independent source, in this particular case the parent company ▪ an annual lump sum payment for all services provided was paid by the subsidiary and was not apportioned in any way ▪ no enduring benefit accrued to the subsidiary from the payment of the fee, and  ▪ the subsidiary acquired no assets in paying the amount. Naturally, the deductibility of management fees will also require that they are genuine and, in most cases, fully documented. The Taxation Review Authority decision in Case 10/2015 (2015) 27 NZTC ¶3-009 provides an example of a situation where the fees were not fully documented and were held not to be genuine. In that case, the TRA concluded that there was no evidence that any management services were in fact supplied. There was no record of services provided and the fee was not fixed by reference to costs incurred but simply by reference to the Trust’s total income. The TRA disallowed the deduction for the management fee because there was an insufficient nexus between the management fee and the gaining or producing of the trust’s assessable income or the carrying on of its business. In the circumstances, the TRA also concluded that the arrangement was a tax avoidance arrangement. The TRA decision was upheld by the High Court and the Court of Appeal in Honk Land Trustees Ltd v C of IR (2016) 27 NZTC ¶22-055 (HC) and (2017) 28 NZTC ¶23-006 (CA).  ¶10-700 Deduction for Māori authority donation A Māori authority is allowed a deduction for donations made to a Māori association or gifts of money made to a donee organisation, ie an organisation that has charitable status. The deduction for the total amount of donations in an income year is limited to the amount of the Māori authority’s net income for the corresponding tax year, calculated before the deduction is taken into account. A deduction is denied to the extent to which the amount is, for the Māori authority, an asset disposed of by a deregistered charity to another charity within 12 months of deregistration. Law: IT07 s DV 12  ¶10-710 Deductibility of motor vehicle expenses  Subpart DE sets out the rules for determining the proportion of business use of a motor vehicle to its total use when a person uses a motor vehicle partly for business purposes and partly for other purposes. The subpart does not apply to a company (other than certain close companies, with effect from 1 April 2017) or a person whose only income is income from employment. See s DE 1. The provisions of subpart DE outline four methods — the default method, actual records, logbook and the kilometre rate method (before 1 April 2017, the mileage rate method) — to ascertain the deduction allowed for the motor vehicle expenses of a self-employed person, such as a sole trader or partner. They endeavour to isolate the component not allowed as a deduction because of the private limitation. Application of the private limitation to motor vehicles expenses is particularly relevant, because travel between home and work is generally classified as private and not income-producing travel. See FC of T v Payne 2001 ATC 4027, where an airline pilot was not allowed to deduct the cost of travel between home and the airport, even though home was also a farming property. Income from the farm was separate from the income earned from flying, so that travel between the farm and the airport was not travel “on work”. Changes from 1 April 2017 With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, subpart DE has been amended to provide that a person can choose to calculate the allowable deduction under either the “costs method” or the “kilometre rate method”: s DE 2(1B). The “costs method” encompasses a deduction for expenditure and depreciation loss based on the proportion of business use of the motor vehicle. This business proportion is calculated using one of the existing methods available — the default method, actual records or a logbook. The “kilometre rate method” replaces the previous mileage rate method and calculates the deduction under a formula that uses standard rates, rather than actual costs, and can be used regardless of the kilometres travelled: s DE 12. If a taxpayer does not elect to use the kilometre rate method, they are treated as making an election to use the costs method: s DE 2B. Application to close companies  With effect from 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, subpart DE has been extended to apply to certain close companies in relation to the provision of motor vehicle benefits to shareholder-employees. The subpart will only apply to close companies where the total fringe benefits provided to all employees are one or two motor vehicles and the close company elects to use the methods in subpart DE to measure the business use of the motor vehicle by its shareholder-employee, rather than the FBT rules. Business use of the motor vehicle by the shareholder-employee will be treated as business use by the close company. The close company can use the proportion of business use by the shareholderemployee to calculate the amount of the company’s deduction for motor vehicle expenditure. A deduction is also available for interest on amounts used to fund, directly or indirectly, expenditure incurred for the business use of a motor vehicle. When a close company uses this option and transfers the value of the private non-deductible portion of the motor vehicle expenditure to the shareholder-employee (for example, by debiting their shareholder current account), the value of the private use of the motor vehicle by the shareholder-employee will not be a dividend. In some circumstances a GST adjustment may be required to reflect any difference between the actual proportions of business and private use of the motor vehicle and the intended proportions of business and private use of the motor vehicle. Costs method From 1 April 2017, the available methods under the costs method heading are the default method, actual records or a logbook. One of these methods will apply if the person has not elected to use the kilometre rate method. Default method The default method applies when a person has not maintained actual records and does not have a logbook. Under the default method, the deduction allowed for a year’s motor vehicle expenses is the lesser of:  ▪ the proportion of total expenses that is commensurate with the proportion that business travel bears to total travel, or ▪ 25% of total expenses. Actual records Actual records may be kept of every journey on business, and a deduction claimed for so much of the year’s total expenses that are commensurate with the proportion of business travel to total travel. Logbook method A logbook may be kept for a test period of 90 days, and the proportions of business/private travel recorded in the logbook become the basis of calculating the deduction allowed for that year and the next three years. At the end of that period, a fresh test period would need to be undertaken. The Commissioner can require the creation of a new logbook if it is considered that the existing one is not representative of business travel. From 1 April 2017 — Kilometre rate method From 1 April 2017, for the 2017–18 and later income years, the calculation of deductions for dual use vehicles has been simplified. Taxpayers can use standard values, rather than calculating actual costs. The previous mileage rate method has been extended and modified so that it can be used regardless of the kilometres travelled. Under the kilometre rate method, taxpayers deduct a fixed amount per kilometre travelled for business purposes based on rates published by IR. This is instead of deducting any actual costs. The Commentary to the relevant Bill stated that the rates will be: ▪ set by reference to industry figures, and based on the average per kilometre cost for the average vehicle ▪ divided into two tiers. The first tier will provide for the recovery of both the vehicle’s fixed costs and its per kilometre costs. The second tier will provide for the recovery of the per kilometre costs only (as the fixed costs of vehicle ownership would be  over-deducted with increasing usage if a single fixed rate were used) ▪ published by IR and updated each year to ensure the rates are accurate. The first tier of rates will apply to the total distance travelled (including for both business and personal purposes) up to a specified limit. To calculate the deduction for this tier, taxpayers will multiply the total kilometres travelled (to which the first tier applies) by the proportion of business use for the vehicle and the income year (calculated under one of the costs methods discussed above). The product of that calculation will then be multiplied by the rate for the first tier to produce the deductible amount. The calculation will be repeated for the second tier of rates. That is, the total kilometres travelled (to which the second tier of rates applies) will be multiplied by the proportion of business use for the vehicle and the income year. The product of this calculation is then multiplied by the rate for the second tier to give the deductible amount. The deductible amounts for the first and second tiers of rates are then added together to determine the taxpayer’s total deduction for their business use of the vehicle. Operational statements on using the kilometre rate method In July 2018, IR released Operational Statement OS 18/01, “Commissioner’s statement on using a kilometre rate for business running of a motor vehicle” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 4, August 2018 at 99). However, following feedback, it was decided that OS 18/01 would be better split into two parts, one covering business deductions and the other covering employee reimbursements. In August 2019, two separate statements were issued to update and replace the former statement. OS 19/04a, “Commissioner’s statement on using a kilometre rate for business running of a motor vehicle – deductions” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 81), explains how the kilometre rates are to be applied when dealing with deductions for business use of a motor vehicle and is discussed below. OS 19/04b, “Commissioner’s statement on using a  kilometre rate for employee reimbursement of a motor vehicle” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 9, October 2019 at 85), deals with the reimbursement of expenditure incurred by an employee where the employee uses their private motor vehicle in the employer’s business and is discussed at ¶3-445. The rates that applied for the 2017–18 income year are as follows: Vehicle Type  Tier One Rate Tier Two Rate  Petrol or Diesel  76 cents  26 cents  Petrol Hybrid  76 cents  18 cents  Electric  76 cents  9 cents  In May 2019, IR released the rates that applied for the 2018–19 income year as follows: Vehicle Type  Tier One Rate Tier Two Rate  Petrol or Diesel  79 cents  30 cents  Petrol Hybrid  79 cents  19 cents  Electric  79 cents  9 cents  OS 19/04 (KM 2020) For the 2019–20 income year, the Commissioner originally advised that taxpayers could use the above 2019 rates: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 5, June 2020 at 23. This was a result of COVID19 meaning the Commissioner had not received third party information to determine the 2020 kilometre rates. Therefore, taxpayers could use the 2019 rates and adjust their 2020 income tax returns under s 113 or 113A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 if there was a material difference from the final 2020 rates. In December 2020, the Commissioner released the following table of rates for the 2020 income year in OS 19/04 (KM 2020): Vehicle Type  Tier One Rate Tier Two rate  Vehicle Type  Tier One Rate Tier Two rate  Petrol or Diesel  82 cents  28 cents  Petrol Hybrid  82 cents  17 cents  Electric  82 cents  9 cents  The Tier One Rate applies for the business portion of the first 14,000 kms travelled by the vehicle in a year. The Tier Two Rate applies for the business portion of any travel in excess of 14,000 kms. However, in the absence of a logbook (or actual records), s DE 4(2) limits any deductions to a maximum of 25% as a proportion of business use of a motor vehicle (provided that such a percentage can be justified). For the Tier One Rate, this equates to the first 3,500 business kilometres (14,000 x 25%). Taxpayers can elect to use the kilometre rate method on a per vehicle basis. However, any election must be made when the tax return is filed for the year in which the vehicle is acquired or they first start using the vehicle for business purposes. The election is irrevocable, so taxpayers cannot switch between methods for the same vehicle, although they may apply different methods to different vehicles. Taxpayers who already owned a vehicle that they used for dual purposes at 1 April 2017 could switch to the new method for the 2017–18 income year by electing to do so in their return, provided they did not dispose of the vehicle in that year. If a taxpayer does not elect to use the kilometre rate method, they are treated as making an election to use the costs method. See s DE 2B. There is no depreciation deduction or recovery of depreciation where a taxpayer has elected to use the kilometre rate method for a vehicle. Example 1: Greater than 14,000 km travelled — logbook maintained The taxpayer uses their petrol car for both business and private purposes. The previous logbook test period calculates that 60% of the travel is for business purposes. The car travelled a total of 20,000 km for the 2018–19 income year. Deduction:  Tier One — 14,000 x $0.79 x 60% = $6,636.00 Tier Two — 6,000 x $0.30 x 60% = $1,080.00 Total deduction $7,716.00 Example from OS 19/04a, “Commissioner’s statement on using a kilometre rate for business running of a motor vehicle — deductions”.  Before 1 April 2017 — Inland Revenue mileage rates Before 1 April 2017, the mileage rate method was the fourth method available for determining a deduction. This method was only available if a person’s business travel was 5,000 km or less in an income year. A person had to keep details of the business use of the vehicle and calculate the mileage travelled for business purposes. This distance was then multiplied by the mileage rate set by the Commissioner to give the amount of the deduction. Distinguishing between business and private travel The Commissioner addressed the topic of the distinction between business and private travel in an interpretation statement, IS3448, “Travel by Motor Vehicle Between Home and Work — Deductibility of Expenditure and FBT Implications” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 16, No 10, November 2004 at 31). The statement expresses the view that travel is business and not private travel in the following circumstances: ▪ where a vehicle is essential for transport of goods or equipment necessary for the performance of income-earning activities at the home and elsewhere, for example, a musician transporting his own instruments ▪ where the taxpayer carries on an itinerant occupation so that the home is the taxpayer’s base of operations ▪ where the taxpayer is required to be accessible at the home for employment duties and is required to undertake travel in response to emergency calls, and  ▪ where the travel is for work purposes between two related workplaces, one of which is also the taxpayer’s home. The interpretation statement also addresses the situation in which a journey undertaken for business purposes that includes a deviation of no significant distance for a private reason would be classified as business travel. The comment is made that any additional distance travelled for a private reason in the course of a journey undertaken for business purposes must be insignificant in comparison with the total journey. As a guideline, the statement says that private travel that represents the lesser of approximately 2 km or approximately 5% of the journey would be minor or insignificant. To illustrate this view, the statement gives the following example: Example 2: A self-employed plumber whose home is his base of operations goes to the gym on his way home at the end of the day. The stop at the gym involves the taxpayer travelling an alternative route from the last job of the day to the home work base, which adds 1 km to the journey. The total journey is 17 km. The travel to the gym (5.8% of the journey) would be minor or insignificant private use.  The statement also recognises that in some cases travel involving an intermediate stop between two points could be two journeys rather than a single journey. Whether this is so depends on what the real purpose of the journey is and whether the intermediate stop is incidental to the entire journey: a taxpayer who travels to the office in order to carry out substantive business activities and then travels to another place for business purposes, would undertake two journeys. On the assumption that travel between the taxpayer’s home and work is private travel, the first journey would be private. Example 3: A taxpayer travels from home to the taxpayer’s office where the taxpayer has appointments with clients. Later in the day, the taxpayer travels to a supplier’s premises for a meeting. The journey to the taxpayer’s office and the journey to the supplier’s premises are separate journeys.  The statement also expresses the view that travel for business purposes is not conferred merely because the vehicle is driven home for security reasons. In addition, the performance of incidental tasks such as picking up mail or newspapers or making a business call on the way to work would not make the trip business travel. This applies only if the travel between home and work is not itself business travel. Operational statement on employer-provided travel In December 2019, Inland Revenue released operational statement OS 19/05, “Employer-provided travel from home to a distant workplace — income tax (PAYE) and fringe benefit tax”, which clarifies and simplifies the tax rules for employer-related travel to distant workplaces. For the purposes of the statement, employer-provided travel means: ▪ travel an employer organises ▪ travel an employee organises but an employer pays for ▪ travel an employer reimburses an employee for, or ▪ an allowance paid to an employee by their employer that is paid to cover the cost of travel to a distant workplace. A distant workplace is defined as a workplace that is not within reasonable daily travelling distance of the employee’s home. An employer “providing” the employee’s travel includes paying for it directly or indirectly, including by way of a reimbursement or an allowance. The cost of home-to-work travel is generally private expenditure as it is incurred so an employee can get to work. As this expenditure is usually private, if the employer provides the employee’s travel from home to work, the starting point is that it is taxable. If an allowance or a reimbursement is taxable for income tax purposes, then the employer must deduct and pay PAYE in relation to that payment. This is because the allowance or reimbursing payment would be “salary or wages” under the PAYE rules.  The statement adopts the same approach as IS3448 to the question of whether home-to-work travel is private expenditure, recognising the same four broad factual situations where travel between home and work is regarded as business or work-related travel. With regard to the need for the home to be a workplace, OS 19/05 states: “23. It is not sufficient to establish that the home is or can be a workplace. For expenditure to be deductible, the need for the work to be performed at the home, and, therefore, the need for the travel, must arise from the nature of the work and not from the personal choice or personal circumstances of the taxpayer. 24. In addition, the actual travel must be travel undertaken in the course of performing work (that is, the travel is “on work”). If that is the case, then the cost of that travel is not private expenditure of the employee; rather, it is expenditure that would be deductible if employees were not otherwise prevented from claiming deductions. This means the employer does not have to deduct PAYE in respect of the reimbursement or allowance, and the employee is not liable for income tax on the payments.” Where an employer provides travel from a person’s home to their workplace (other than by way of a motor vehicle), the position is that this “benefit” amounts to a “fringe benefit” as it is an “unclassified benefit”. The travel will be subject to FBT unless one of the exclusions apply. The Commissioner considers employer-provided travel from home to a distant workplace will be subject to FBT unless: ▪ the need for the work to be performed partly at home (and, therefore, the need for the travel itself) arises from the nature of the work, and ▪ the travel itself is actually “on work”. Inland Revenue’s approach In summary, Inland Revenue’s approach is that employer-provided travel from home to a distant workplace will be taxable (and subject to FBT or income tax) unless one of the following applies:  ▪ the travel is one-off or very occasional (de minimis applies) ▪ the travel relates to a temporary posting or secondment (up to two years) ▪ the employee also genuinely works at a hometown workplace (meaning they have two workplaces), or ▪ the employee works from home on specified days (home being their place of work on those days) and the travel relates to one of those days. The statement provides a number of examples that demonstrate how this approach applies. Recognising that some taxpayers may need time to implement the approach set out above, the Commissioner has stated that she does not expect taxpayers to apply the statement to travel taken before 1 April 2020, although they may choose to do so. It is also acknowledged that to the extent there is an inconsistency between OS 19/05 and IS3448, the approach in OS 19/05 is to be followed. The statement is published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 1, February 2020 at 84. Law: IT07 ss DE 1–DE 12  ¶10-720 Deductibility of motor vehicle expenses — dealers A motor vehicle dealer who purchases a vehicle, uses it for both business and private purposes and then sells has been the subject of a special ruling issued by Inland Revenue (IR) in Public Information Bulletin No 159, February 1987. According to that ruling, a motor vehicle dealer may use the following formula to calculate  deductible vehicle expenditure:  Vehicle expenses in the first step include petrol and oil but not repairs, tyres and registration. Only those repairs and costs directly attributable to private running are included in the formula. ▸ Note: However, note that IR has recently completed a review of the content of all Public Information Bulletins. In the course of this review, IR has identified those items that are no longer relevant and will not be republished. Other items have been updated and reprinted in a current Tax Information Bulletin. Additional items are still under review and IR has indicated that caution should be employed in relying on such items. The review indicates that IR’s ruling on motor vehicle dealers is currently still under review.  ¶10-730 Deductibility of offshore payments The Commissioner has wide powers to screen deductions claimed by taxpayers for payments or losses to overseas persons. If the Commissioner seeks further information about a claim and none is supplied within 90 days, the Commissioner may disallow the deduction wholly or partly and the deduction may not be raised by the taxpayer in subsequent objection proceedings. When a taxpayer alleges that a payment or loss was incurred to an overseas person (or his or her New Zealand agent), the Commissioner may issue an information requisition. This document requires the deduction to be  justified by some further information, the production of documents or completion of a statutory declaration. It may be sent to the taxpayer or to any other person. If a response is made to the requisition, whether by the taxpayer or other recipient, further evidential restrictions apply if there is an objection or challenge to the final tax assessment. The taxpayer is restricted to the evidence contained in, or referred to by, the response. Other evidence in the Commissioner’s possession at the date of the requisition is also admissible if it can be verified. The Commissioner’s power to adduce evidence on his own behalf remains unfettered. Example: The Commissioner applied for an order to exclude evidence, sought to be relied on by the plaintiffs in challenge proceedings, which had not been provided to the Commissioner by the plaintiffs as required by an information requisition. The High Court dismissed the Commissioner’s application on the basis that the information requisition was not given in accordance with the requirements in s 14 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 for the giving of notices and was not valid. See Hieber v C of IR; London Continental Ltd v C of IR (2002) 20 NZTC 17,562. The decision regarding the effective service of notice was reversed in Hieber v C of IR (2002) 20 NZTC 17,774.  An information requisition given to an agent for a partnership or a partner in a partnership is deemed to be given by the Commissioner to every partner in the partnership. The legislation is silent on whether an information requisition given to one trustee is deemed to be given to all trustees. However, the High Court has held that there is no reason to distinguish between partners and trustees on this point and that it is sufficient for the information requisition to be given to one trustee. See Hieber (supra). Law: TAA s 17F  ¶10-750 Deductibility of costs related to patents and design registrations  Costs incurred in the creation or purchase of a patent are subject to a deduction as a depreciation loss. See ¶13-540. Outside of the deduction for a depreciation loss, a number of provisions address the deduction of expenses relating to patents. Unsuccessful patent application A deduction is allowed under s DB 37 for costs incurred in an unsuccessful application for a patent. This is where the costs would have been classified as the cost of fixed life intangible property if the application had been granted, and provided the taxpayer is not allowed a deduction for the expenditure under another provision. The section also allows a deduction where expenditure has been incurred by a taxpayer on an intended application for the grant of a patent that they decide not to lodge. Section CG 7B provides that deductions that have been taken for an aborted or unsuccessful application for the grant of a patent are clawed back as income if the taxpayer subsequently sells the abandoned application property or uses it in the lodging of a patent application. In the latter case, the clawed back amount is included in the cost of the intangible property to be depreciated over the life of the depreciable asset. Unsuccessful design registrations Section DB 37 also allows deductions for expenditure on design registrations where the application was not lodged or was withdrawn. The deduction is allocated to the income year in which the taxpayer decides not to lodge the application, withdraws the application or is refused the grant of design registration. In addition, the claw back of income under s CG 7B applies to deductions taken for unsuccessful or withdrawn applications for design registration if the taxpayer subsequently sells or uses the property. See ¶5-352. Patent acquired before 23 September 1997 A deduction is allowed under s DB 36 for expenses on the grant, maintenance or extension of a patent that had been acquired before 23 September 1997. This is provided the patent is used to derive income in the year the expenditure is incurred.  In relation to a patent acquired after 22 September 1997, the general permission may allow a deduction for expenditure on, for example, maintenance of the patent. Other expenditure which is of a capital nature may give rise to a deduction by way of a depreciation loss. Disposal of a patent Upon the disposal of all patent rights, a deduction is allowed under s DB 38 for the residue of any costs of devising the patent which have not already been allowed as a deduction. If only some of the rights are disposed of, a deduction is allowed for so much of the residue of undeducted costs that is commensurate with the proportion that disposal proceeds are of the market value of all of the patent rights. Disposal of patent rights or applications acquired on or after 1 April 1993 A deduction is allowed under s DB 40 for the cost of acquiring, on or after 1 April 1993, any patent rights or a patent application with a complete specification. The amount of the deduction is to be reduced by the component of the costs which have been allowed as a deduction by way of a depreciation loss. When determining the cost of the patent application or patent rights, any expenditure for which a deduction has been allowed under s DZ 15 is excluded. Section DZ 15 allows a one-off deduction for any costs associated with a patent application that was lodged before 1 April 2005 but which was granted after that date. The deduction can be claimed in the income year in which the patent is granted. From the 2005–06 income year, depreciation deductions begin from the time a patent application with complete specification is made. See ¶13-540. From the 2007–08 income year, income from the disposal of a patent application with complete specification or patent rights under s CB 30 can be spread over three years. See ¶5-222. In June 2017, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement IS 17/05, “Income tax — treatment of New Zealand patents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 4), which discusses the income tax treatment of patents and provides examples of the operation of the provisions. The statement updates and replaces an  earlier statement by updating legislative references, discussing legislative changes and recording a change of view by the Commissioner on the treatment of expenditure for underlying intangible items after asset recognition (see ¶13-540) and patent maintenance and renewal fees. The Commissioner’s previous statement treated patent maintenance and renewal fees as part of the depreciable cost of the patent. The Commissioner’s opinion now is that patent maintenance and renewal fees are revenue in nature and deductible in the year they are incurred. This is mainly because of the recurrent nature of the fees, being payable on an annual basis in terms of the Patents Act 2013 (which differs from the less frequent payment structure under the Patents Act 1953). Law: IT07 ss CG 7B, DB 36, DB 37, DB 38, DB 40, DZ 15  ¶10-760 Deductibility of costs related to plant variety rights grant Section DB 40BA allows a taxpayer a deduction for capital expenditure they have incurred for the purpose of applying for the grant of plant variety rights, but they do not obtain the plant variety rights because the application is not lodged or is withdrawn, or because the grant is refused. The section applies where the expenditure would have been part of the cost of fixed life intangible property, or otherwise a deduction, if the application or intended application had been granted and it is not deductible under any other provision. A deduction under the new section will be allocated to the income year in which the taxpayer decides not to lodge the application, withdraws the application or is refused the grant of plant variety rights. Section CG 7B provides that deductions that have been taken for an aborted or unsuccessful application for the grant of plant variety rights are clawed back as income if the taxpayer subsequently sells the abandoned application property or uses it in obtaining the grant of plant variety rights. In the latter case, the clawed back amount is  included in the cost of the intangible property to be depreciated over the life of the depreciable asset. Law: IT07 ss CG 7B, DB 40BA  ¶10-800 Deductibility of rates Rates payable in relation to land used as part of business activities can be expected to be allowed as a deduction. The rates may be viewed as a working expense of the business. Note that a deduction for rates payable in relation to land that falls within the mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG (land used partly for business use and partly for private use that is also unused for a period during the year) will be subject to apportionment under those rules: see ¶10-035. Rates may continue to be allowed as a deduction, even though the taxpayer may no longer employ the property in mainstream business activities. Rates and taxes were allowed as a deduction in full in relation to land once used for farming purposes but latterly leased for grazing purposes to defray expenses. The land remained part of the income-earning structure of the business despite the change in use. See New Zealand Co-operative Dairy Co Ltd v C of IR (1990) 12 NZTC 7,128. The opposite conclusion was reached in de Pelichet McLeod and Co Ltd v C of IR (1982) 5 NZTC 61,216. This was in relation to a stock and station business which used part of its land holdings to grow crops, hold stock overnight, store materials and for leasing. The Court of Appeal thought that the land was not used in any substantial way in connection with the business. The Court did not explain in any detail why a deduction is allowed only if the land is used in a “substantial” way for business purposes. It is generally accepted that it is not for the Commissioner or a court to say how much a trader ought to spend in obtaining his income. See ¶10-021. If the property is sold, the invariable practice is to make an apportionment of the year’s rates up until settlement. The rates  accrued to settlement continue to be allowed as a deduction despite the sale. See FC of T v Morgan (1961) 106 CLR 517. The timing of the deduction for rates may raise issues. The Commissioner’s practice may be illustrated by reference to an example. Example: Rates may have partly accrued at balance date, yet that part may not be payable until some time after balance date. In this instance the Commissioner would allow a deduction for the amount of rates accrued at balance date. TP Ltd has a balance date for 31 January, but the rates payable are not due until the following 31 August. TP Ltd is allowed a deduction for 5/12 of the annual rates if that was its regular accounting practice.  ¶10-810 Deductibility of relocation costs The Commissioner has addressed the possible deduction of a range of expenses that might be incurred in the course of physically relocating a business within New Zealand. Interpretation statement IS 10/06, “Deductibility of business relocation costs”, was released by Inland Revenue in August 2010 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 8, September 2010 at 20). The interpretation statement addresses the deductibility of business relocation expenditure incurred in the relocation of a business within New Zealand, that is, the costs associated with physically relocating business records, trading stock, employees, and items of depreciable property from the business’ existing location to its new location. The Commissioner considers the types of costs typically incurred to physically move a business (and those costs covered by this interpretation statement and referred to as “business relocation costs”) are: ▪ packaging and packing/unpacking costs ▪ freight costs  ▪ temporary storage costs ▪ additional insurance premiums on cover acquired specifically for the move ▪ hire charges for the use of containers, forklifts and similar machinery to effect the relocation, and ▪ expenditure on labour, in the form of salary or wages, or payments to contractors to effect the dismantling, relocation and re-assembly of property. The interpretation statement expressly does not consider the following: ▪ the deductibility of any costs associated with vacating the old premises or preparing the new premises ▪ the costs of building alterations or fit-out, except the cost of any walls that may need to be temporarily removed to enable egress for property to be re-sited ▪ the deductibility of lease termination or surrender payments, lessee re-instatement costs, legal costs or similar types of expenditure relating to the location itself, as these costs are one step removed from the cost of physically relocating business property ▪ the deductibility of relocation costs where the business relocates to another country ▪ the deductibility of costs incurred in respect of individual relocations of employees or plant or equipment. Where employees are relocated as part of the business relocation, the relocation costs covered by the interpretation statement are confined to costs (or allowances) that relate to the actual physical relocation of the employees and their personal moveable property, rather than any inducement or compensation-type payments made  to employees for relocating. The employee relocation costs covered by the statement are therefore limited to the cost to the business of: ▪ transporting employees to the new location (for example, removal expenses), including the cost of an allowance paid to an employee to cover such costs, and ▪ temporary accommodation for employees moved to a new business location, including the cost of an allowance paid to an employee to cover such costs. The interpretation statement concludes that a business is entitled to claim a deduction for business relocation expenditure if the costs are deductible under s DA 1(1) (the general permission) and if those costs are not excluded under s DA 2 (the capital limitation). The interpretation statement deals with relocation expenditure collectively, rather than expenditure based on the underlying type of property being moved. This approach has been taken as the Commissioner is of the view that the relocation costs covered by IS 10/06 will all be incurred for the same principal reason, on the occurrence of the same event and therefore should receive the same tax treatment. Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DA 2  ¶10-820 Remitted amounts An amount allowed as a deduction may subsequently be remitted to create an item of assessable income. See ¶5-340. However, if subsequently the amount in question is actually paid despite the remission, a deduction becomes available for the amount paid. The deduction is allowed in the year of payment. The provisions allowing the deduction do not extend to amounts subject to the financial arrangements rules. The outcome may be that the provisions apply, for example, to a debt for the purchase of trading stock. Law: IT07 s DB 47  ¶10-830 Deductibility of rent Rent can be expected to be allowed as a deduction as a usual working expense of a business. A deduction in full may be less certain in a situation where the rent is associated with an ability to acquire the leased premises. The taxpayer in FC of T v South Australian Battery Makers Pty Ltd 78 ATC 4412 leased premises on terms which included an option to purchase granted in favour of a sister subsidiary company. If the option was exercised, the purchase price was to take into account the rent which had been paid. The Commissioner contended that the rent paid should not be deducted in full but should be reduced to reflect the component that would be applied to reduce the purchase price if the option was exercised. This approach was rejected and the rent allowed as a deduction in full. The advantage sought by the taxpayer in paying the rent was the conventional one of the right to use the premises for business purposes. The taxpayer did not obtain a possible collateral advantage if another party exercised the option and paid a reduced purchase price. Under a sale and leaseback arrangement, the parties expected that the vendor/lessee would repurchase the plant at the end of the lease term. That possibility did not operate to prevent the payments of rent being allowed as deduction in full. The lessee had no legal right to repurchase the premises. See FC of T v Metal Manufactures Ltd 2001 ATC 4152. Inadequate rent If the Commissioner exercises the power to substitute a market rent where the parties have agreed on an inadequate rent, the substituted rent rather than the actual rent is potentially allowed as a deduction. See public binding ruling BR Pub 06/02, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 30. In relation to partnerships, see ¶23-134. Law: IT07 ss DB 59, GC 5  ¶10-840 Deductibility of repairs and maintenance expenditure Expenditure on the repairs and maintenance of an asset may be allowed as a deduction if the general permission is satisfied and the capital limitation does not apply. Note that if the repairs and maintenance expenditure relates to an asset falling within the mixeduse asset rules in subpart DG (being certain assets used for both business and private purposes), an apportionment of the expenditure will be necessary under those rules (see ¶10-035). The Commissioner has issued an interpretation statement, IS 12/03, “Income tax — deductibility repairs and maintenance expenditure — general principles”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 7, August 2012. The principles outlined in IS 12/03 are summarised below. In determining whether repairs and maintenance expenditure is deductible, the expenditure must first satisfy the general permission (in other words, there must be a sufficient nexus with the derivation of assessable income). The Commissioner considers that, in certain circumstances, the general permission may not be satisfied. Example 1: Jack owns a rental property. Jack’s tenant has just moved out. Although Jack advertised the property he is experiencing difficulty finding a new tenant. He concludes that the reason he cannot find a new tenant is that the property is too run down. Jack decides to tidy up the property to make it more attractive to potential tenants. The property is temporarily unavailable for rental while Jack arranges to have the property repaired, cleaned, and painted. Once this work has been done Jack will look for a new tenant. The expenditure that Jack incurs will have a sufficient nexus to Jack deriving assessable income from his rental activity. Example adopted from IS 12/03, “Income tax — deductibility repairs and maintenance expenditure — general principles” (29 June 2012).  Example 2: Tina owned a residential rental property for several years. Two years ago she decided to move into the house and use it as her home. This year she has undertaken repairs on the property and had it fully repainted. Tina seeks to claim a deduction for the cost of the repairs to her house on the basis they related to damage sustained when the  house was tenanted. However, the repair costs are not deductible because the rental activity has ceased and the house is no longer being used to derive assessable income. At the time the expenditure was incurred it did not have the necessary nexus to Tina’s assessable income. Example adopted from IS 12/03, “Income tax — deductibility repairs and maintenance expenditure — general principles” (29 June 2012).  Once the general permission is satisfied, it is still necessary to establish whether the capital limitation applies to deny a deduction. Here, a two-stage approach is adopted: ▪ the first step is to identify the relevant asset that is being repaired ▪ the second step is to assess the nature and extent of work done to the asset. Identify relevant asset Identification of the relevant asset is important in order to measure the extent of the work undertaken to the particular asset and, therefore, whether the work undertaken is revenue or capital in nature. Identifying what the relevant asset is will depend upon the facts of each case. This stage involves what the courts have labelled the “entirety test”, in other words “a physical thing which satisfies a particular notion”. An asset may be a separate physical thing or a component part of a wider asset. In determining whether an asset is a separate physical asset, factors such as size, location and function may have to be considered. Example 3: Frank is an owner-operator taxi driver. He has driven the same taxi for the past five years. Until recently the taxi has been reliable and overall is in good condition. Frank has had his taxi serviced regularly but his mechanic has advised him that the engine is now seriously worn. The mechanic recommends that the worn engine be replaced with a reconditioned engine. The asset in this case is the taxi. The engine is a subsidiary part of that asset, and is physically and functionally connected to that larger asset. The engine is integral to the taxi. Example adopted from IS 12/03, “Income tax — deductibility repairs and maintenance expenditure — general principles” (29 June 2012).  Nature and extent of work undertaken on asset If the nature and extent of the work undertaken means that the work is of a capital nature, then a deduction will not be permitted for the repairs and maintenance expenditure. The following principles apply in this regard:  ▪ Work that has resulted in the reconstruction, replacement or renewal of the asset, or substantially the whole of the asset is capital in nature. ▪ Expenditure incurred to repair or maintain the asset, over and above making good wear and tear, that has the effect of changing the character of the asset will be capital in nature. Expenditure incurred to repair or maintain the asset without changing its character will be deductible. ▪ The use of new materials does not necessarily mean that an asset is improved, unless, as a result, the asset is more advantageous or performs or functions better or differently than it did previously. If the use of better materials results in an asset which is more advantageous, or performs or functions better, then this may indicate that the character of the asset has changed, with the result that the expenditure may be capital in nature. Where new materials are used extensively so that the asset, or substantially the whole of the asset, is reconstructed, replaced or renewed, the cost of the work done will be capital expenditure regardless of the choice of materials. ▪ Changes to an asset’s value, its earning capacity, its useful life, function or operating capacity, whether or not a goal of the work done, cannot be relied on in isolation to establish the nature of the work done to the asset. Example 4: Peter and Alice own a residential rental property in Wellington that was built 30 years ago. After a cold snap, their tenants complain that the insulation in the house has deteriorated and is no longer effective. Peter and Alice arrange for new insulation to be inserted into the house. The cost of the insulation is revenue in nature on the basis that it is a repair to the property and does not change the character of the asset. Nor does it result in a replacement or renewal of substantially the whole of the house. The work done only restores the property to its former condition. Example adopted from IS 12/03, “Income tax — deductibility repairs and maintenance expenditure — general principles” (29 June 2012).  Example 5: Work involved the demolition of a shell race track and the construction on the same site of a limestone track. The work on the new track included strengthening the foundation, altering the levels, grading of bends and approaches, and replacement of retaining walls and running rails. The Court found that this work involved more than just repairs or alterations. To demolish the old track and construct on the same site a new, better and different track was a total reconstruction. The expenditure was, therefore, not deductible. See Auckland Trotting Club (Inc) v C of IR [1968] NZLR 967.  Example 6: The cost of conversion from overhead to underground power reticulation was held by the Court of Appeal to be capital expenditure and non-deductible for tax purposes. The Court found that the work overall on the undergrounding programme was so substantial and was intended to produce such a different and operationally superior asset for the power board that it was impossible to regard it as anything but a capital improvement. See Poverty Bay Electric Power Board v C of IR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,001 (CA). See also the High Court judgment in Hawkes Bay Power Distribution Ltd v C of IR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,685, a case linked to Poverty Bay Electric Power Board.  Notional repairs The Commissioner also confirms in IS 12/03 that no deduction is permitted for notional repairs. No deduction can be claimed for work that has not been carried out. Repair of recently acquired asset In some cases, a deduction may be allowed for the cost of repairing an asset soon after its acquisition. When repair expenditure occurs at more or less recurring intervals it is deductible as repairs, even though some of it may relate to use of the asset by the previous owner. However, when the previous owner of a recently acquired asset has allowed it to deteriorate below an acceptable standard for an operating unit, the more substantial “dilapidation” repairs necessary to place the asset in an income-earning condition in most cases result in an increase in the value of the asset. Therefore, their cost would not be deductible. When the dilapidation expenditure occurs immediately following acquisition of the asset, the case for  non-deductibility is stronger. See also IS 12/03, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 7, August 2012 at 99–100. Commercial fit-out Note that when the definition of building was changed to allow building fit-out to be depreciable property, an oversight produced an unintended policy outcome that may have allowed the replacement of an item of commercial fit-out to be immediately deductible as repairs and maintenance. Section DB 22B (originally enacted as s DA 5) was introduced with retrospective effect to ensure that the improvement or replacement of a previously separately depreciated item of commercial fit-out is capitalised and depreciated over its estimated useful life.  ¶10-850 Research and development deductions A deduction may be allowed under the general permission for expenditure on scientific research that is part of business activities. A taxpayer incurred expenditure on scientific research in the course of identifying medical products for commercial exploitation. The Court thought that there was much to be said for the view that the expenditure was on revenue account. For a company engaged in developing new technology, expenditure on research becomes a part of the regular cost of trading operations and of the process by which regular returns are obtained. See Goodman Fielder Wattie Ltd v FC of T 91 ATC 4438. Scientific research A deduction is allowed under s DB 33 for expenditure incurred in connection with scientific research carried on for the purpose of deriving assessable income. There is an exclusion from deduction for expenditure incurred on an asset that the research does not create and that confers a deduction for a depreciation loss. Research or development A deduction is allowed under s DB 34 for expenditure incurred on research or development where one of the following applies:  ▪ the expenditure is expensed either under para 68(a) of NZIAS 38 Intangible Assets, applying, for the purposes of that paragraph, paras 54 to 67 of NZIAS 38, or under para 5.1 or 5.2 of Financial Reporting Standard No 13, 1995 or because para 5.4 of that Standard applies, or ▪ the expenditure is written off for financial reporting purposes because it is immaterial but that expenditure would be required to be expensed under para 68(a) of NZIAS 38 or para 5.1 or 5.2 of Financial Reporting Standard No 13, 1995 if it were material, or ▪ the expenditure for the year does not exceed $10,000, it is immaterial and it has been expensed for financial reporting purposes. No deduction is allowed for expenditure on property to which all the following apply: ▪ the property is used in carrying out research or development ▪ the property is not created from the research or development, and ▪ the property is one of the following kinds: □ depreciable property □ otherwise amortisable under a provision outside subpart EE □ land □ intangible property (not being depreciable intangible property), or □ property its owner chooses not to depreciate. To prevent a double deduction for the expenditure relating to a patent, the cost of the patent does not include the research or development expenditure allowed as a deduction.  NZIAS 38 defines “development” as “the application of research findings or other knowledge to a plan or design for the production of new or substantially improved materials, devices, products, processes, systems or services before the start of commercial production or use”. “Research” is defined as “original and planned investigation undertaken with the prospect of gaining new scientific or technical knowledge and understanding”. Timing of research and development deductions Taxpayers can choose to allocate certain research and development deductions to income years after the income year in which the expenditure was incurred. This flexibility creates a better timing match between the recognition of income from research and development and the recognition of the expenditure. The allocation rule reflects the growth cycle of many technology companies and means that the deductions of such companies will not be adversely affected by changes in shareholding arising from technology companies bringing in new equity investors after the initial development phase. Types of research and development deductions Three types of research and development deductions are able to be allocated to income years after the income year in which the deduction was incurred. These are as follows: ▪ Expenditure allowed as a deduction under s DB 34. See s DB 34(7). ▪ Depreciation losses for property used in carrying out research and development or for market development for a research and development product. See s EE 1(5). ▪ Market development expenditure allowed as a deduction. See s EJ 22. Expenditure allowed as a deduction under s DB 34 can include overhead costs (eg rent and power), or a portion of the overhead costs if the taxpayer is not exclusively in the business of research  and development. Interest expenditure is specifically excluded from the allocation rule. Taxpayers can choose how much of a qualifying deduction will be allocated to a future income year. The unallocated amount can be claimed as a deduction in the year the expenditure was incurred. Taxpayers can choose not to allocate any of their expenditure to future income years but instead apply the ordinary rules. Allocation of deductions Deductions that qualify must be allocated to an income year in which assessable income is derived that would not have been derived but for the research and development expenditure or the use of or disposal of property used in carrying out research and development. The amount of qualifying deductions allocated to a particular income year is the lesser of: ▪ the amount of assessable income derived that would not have been derived but for the research and development expenditure (or depreciation), and ▪ the amount of qualifying deductions that has not already been allocated to an income year. This means that taxpayers who choose to allocate deductions to future income years can only allocate the qualifying deductions to the extent of any research and development income derived in that year. Under s EJ 23, the deductions cannot be allocated against non-research and development income. However, this does not prevent the taxpayer being able to claim qualifying deductions in the current year if the loss-carry forward rules in Pt I are satisfied. See ¶1-320 and ¶1-330. A taxpayer’s decision as to the allocation of deductions under the rule is reflected in the tax position taken in the annual tax return. A position taken in a tax return is binding on a taxpayer. Derecognised non-depreciable assets  Taxpayers were previously allowed immediate tax deductions for R&D expenditure incurred only up until the point that an intangible asset was recognised under the accounting rules. Any further development expenditure incurred had to be capitalised. In the event that the R&D project did not create an asset that was depreciable for tax purposes, any development expenditure incurred postrecognition of an intangible asset for accounting purposes was generally non-deductible for tax purposes. Changes made reduce distortions against investment in R&D caused by the previous tax rules by allowing capitalised development expenditure to either be deducted over time as depreciation (where the R&D results in a depreciable intangible asset — see ¶13-440) or deducted upon the intangible asset being written off for accounting purposes (where the R&D does not result in a depreciable intangible asset). A taxpayer who has developed an intangible asset (recognised for accounting purposes) that is not depreciable for tax purposes is allowed an income tax deduction for capitalised development expenditure they have incurred on the asset. This only applies for expenditure incurred on development of an intangible asset on or after 7 November 2013 and before the asset is derecognised or written off. The deduction is allowed upon the intangible asset being derecognised or written off for financial reporting purposes (other than due to its disposal). The deduction is allowed irrespective of whether the asset was useful for a period or the R&D was unsuccessful, and is allowed in the income year in which the relevant intangible asset is derecognised for financial reporting purposes. Interpretation statement In June 2017, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement IS 17/05, “Income tax — treatment of New Zealand patents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6, July 2017 at 4), which discusses the income tax treatment of patents, including the treatment of research and development expenditure, and also provides examples of the operation of the provisions. The statement discusses the application of ss DB 33 and DB 34. In relation to derecognition, the statement highlights that a taxpayer  can only deduct expenditure they incur in carrying out development of an intangible asset. Expenditure incurred on purchasing a nondepreciable intangible asset is not deductible to the purchasing taxpayer on derecognition of the asset for financial reporting purposes. However, such a purchasing taxpayer can claim a deduction on derecognition of the asset for any development expenditure they incurred on further developing the asset after purchasing it. Clawback provision A clawback provision, s CG 7C, applies to a taxpayer if they have been allowed a deduction under the changes to s DB 34, and the previously derecognised intangible asset is: ▪ disposed of in an income year for consideration that is not income under any other provision of the Act, or ▪ rerecognised for financial reporting purposes in an income year. In the case of a disposal for consideration, the amount that is clawed back as income is the lesser of the consideration derived for the disposal and the amount of the deduction previously taken. In the case of the asset being rerecognised for financial reporting purposes, the entire amount of the deduction previously taken is clawed back as income. For the purposes of the depreciation rules, the taxpayer is treated as never having had the deduction. Therefore, if the taxpayer eventually acquires an item of depreciable intangible property to which the expenditure relates (for example, if the intangible asset rerecognised by a taxpayer is an invention they subsequently patent), they will be able to deduct the expenditure over time as depreciation. Any income arising under s CG 7C arises in the income year in which the previously derecognised intangible asset is disposed of for consideration, or is rerecognised for financial reporting purposes, as the case may be. Law: IT07 ss CG 7C, DB 33–DB 35, EE 1(5), EJ 22, EJ 23  ¶10-853 Tax credits for research and development tax losses — R&D tax loss “cash out” Legislation to improve cash flow and remove tax distortions on research and development costs for start-up New Zealand businesses applies from 1 April 2015. The provisions are primarily contained in subpart MX. The main points are as follows: ▪ Innovative start-ups are able to “cash out” an amount of their tax losses arising from qualifying R&D expenditure. Instead of carrying the tax loss forward to apply against future assessable income, the company receives a refundable tax credit. ▪ Companies that eventually earn assessable income will return the value of the cashed-out loss through taxes paid on that income. ▪ Companies that make a successful return on their investment through a non-taxable capital gain will have their cashed-out losses reinstated as losses to carry forward by repaying the value of the cashed-out loss out of the gain made. Eligibility The provisions are targeted at innovative New Zealand start-up companies in a tax loss position. The two main eligibility criteria are: ▪ Corporate eligibility criteria — the applicant must be a company resident in New Zealand (and not treated as non-resident under a double tax agreement). The company cannot be a lookthrough company, listed company or entity established under certain statutes. In addition, 50% or more of the shares in the company cannot be held by entities that are each a public authority, local authority, Crown Research Institute or State enterprise. See s MX 2. ▪ Wage intensity criteria — 20% of a company’s expenditure on wages and salaries must be on R&D. This includes expenditure on employee and shareholder-employee salaries and 66% of  contracted R&D. It does not include labour employed on noneligible R&D activities. A company can choose whether to include the value of fringe benefits and employer superannuation contributions in calculating its labour costs. See s MX 3. Example 1: Mattlab Ltd decides from the beginning of the 2017–18 income year to change its remuneration package for its full-time researchers to encourage them to stay in the company’s employment. Its two research scientists, doing R&D full time, are each paid $100,000 pa and will receive superannuation contributions of 5% of their income for each year of service with the company (up to a maximum of 15%). Both have been with the company for two years. Thirteen other staff are paid $1,040,000 in total, and the CEO, who spends one day a week doing R&D, is paid $120,000. Mattlab Ltd has outsourced some R&D work for that year for a price of $75,000 (excluding GST). Option 1 Total R&D labour expenditure is $273,500 [($75,000 × 0.66) + $200,000 + ($120,000 × 0.2)]. Total labour expenditure is $1,409,500 [($75,000 × 0.66) + ($200,000 + $1,040,000) + $120,000]. The wage intensity calculation is $273,500 ÷ $1,409,500 = 0.194. Option 2 Total R&D labour expenditure is $300,100 [($75,000 × 0.66) + $200,000 + $20,000 + $6,600 + ($120,000 × 0.2)]. Total labour expenditure is $1,436,100 [($75,000 × 0.66) + $200,000 + $20,000 + $6,600 + $1,040,000 + $120,000]. The wage intensity calculation is $300,100 ÷ $1,436,100 = 0.209. The superannuation package adds $20,000 of superannuation contributions and $6,600 of tax on superannuation contributions to both the numerator and denominator of the calculation. Mattlab Ltd meets the wage intensity criteria using Option 2, but not if it uses Option 1. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 23.  The company must also: ▪ choose to apply the new subpart (a company may choose to cash out a tax loss in one year and not to cash out a loss in the following year)  ▪ have a net loss for the tax year ▪ incur R&D expenditure in the income year, and ▪ be the person (solely or jointly) in whom the intellectual property and know-how that results from the R&D vests in. A tax loss arising from a deduction for R&D expenditure that is allocated to a future income year under s DB 34(7) (see ¶10-850) cannot be cashed out either in the year the expenditure was incurred or in the year the deduction is allocated to. This is because the definition of “R&D expenditure” (see below) does not include R&D expenditure for which no deduction is available for the income year. If the company is part of an R&D group, the group must also meet the tax loss requirement and wage intensity threshold. An R&D group is a group where each member is a company, look-through company or limited partnership. All members must be in the same group of companies, determined as if the look-through companies and limited partnerships were treated as companies. See s MX 1. R&D expenditure The definition of “R&D expenditure” provides that, for a person, it means expenditure incurred by the person for goods and services to the extent to which they relate to research or development and the intellectual property and know-how resulting from the research or development vests in the person, solely or jointly, but does not include: ▪ expenditure for goods and services relating to a proscribed R&D activity in sch 22 (see below) ▪ expenditure for goods and services used by the person to: □ provide R&D services to a person who is in the business of providing R&D services, or □ further another person’s R&D activities  ▪ expenditure for which no deduction is available for the income year ▪ expenditure for or under a financial arrangement, and ▪ expenditure for the acquisition or transfer of intangible property, core technology, intellectual property or know-how. Proscribed R&D activities Schedule 22 sets out the proscribed R&D activities. The exclusions are similar to the exclusions used for Callaghan Innovation’s business R&D grants and Statistics New Zealand/OECD guidance on how to measure R&D for statistical purposes (the Frascati Manual). The schedule lists the following activities: ▪ An activity performed outside New Zealand. ▪ Acquiring or disposing of land, and related activities, except if the land is used exclusively for housing R&D facilities. ▪ Acquiring, disposing of, or transferring intangible property, core technology, intellectual property, or know-how, and related activities (for example, drafting sale and purchase agreements for patents). ▪ Prospecting for, exploring for, or drilling for, minerals, petroleum, natural gas, or geothermal energy. ▪ Research in social sciences, arts, or humanities. ▪ Market research, market testing, market development, or sales promotion, including consumer surveys. ▪ Quality control or routine testing of materials, products, devices, processes, or services. ▪ Making cosmetic or stylistic changes to materials, products, devices, processes, or services.  ▪ Routine collection of information. ▪ Commercial, legal and administrative aspects of patenting, licensing, or other activities. ▪ Activities involved in complying with statutory requirements or standards. ▪ Management studies or efficiency surveys. ▪ Reproduction of a commercial product or process by a physical examination of an existing system or from plans, blueprints, detailed specifications, or publicly available information. ▪ Pre-production activities, such as a demonstration of commercial viability, tooling-up, and trial runs. Cashing out losses An eligible company will be able to cash out tax losses generated from eligible R&D activities. The cash-out is delivered in the form of a refundable tax credit. Section MX 4 provides that the amount cashed out is the lesser of the following amounts multiplied by the company tax rate: ▪ the company’s net losses for the year up to a maximum of $500,000 in the 2015–16 tax year (ie a refund of up to $140,000) increasing by $300,000 each tax year up to a maximum of $2m in the 2020–21 and later tax years ▪ the company’s total R&D expenditure for the tax year, and ▪ 1.5 times the company’s total R&D labour expenditure for the tax year. The tax losses cashed out are extinguished: s MX 5. The calculation in s MX 4 is based on the company tax rate, so s MX 6 allows a company to claim a deduction for losses that had  previously been cashed out at a lower company tax rate if the company tax rate increases. Only the net loss for the relevant year is able to be cashed out, ie carried forward tax losses cannot be cashed out. Any net losses for a year that cannot be cashed out will be carried forward under the usual rules. Example 2: Amblack Ltd is a company carrying out R&D on a new variety of avocado that also tastes of lemon. They have two senior plant researchers and a technician working full time on the project. In the 2016–17 tax year, Amblack Ltd had a net loss of $600,000, spent $425,000 on R&D, and the researchers and technician were paid $245,000 in salary and wages for R&D. The amounts under the three tests are: $600,000 (being less than the cap for 2016–17 of $800,000) > $425,000 > $245,000 × 1.5 = $367,500 each multiplied by the company tax rate of 0.28 for that year. Amblack Ltd is eligible to receive a R&D loss tax credit of $102,900 for that year ($367,500 × 0.28). Example adapted from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 3, April 2016 at 24.  Section MX 6 creates a new deduction if the company tax rate increases after a tax loss has been cashed out. This ensures a company is not disadvantaged by electing to cash out a loss instead of carrying it forward if the corporate tax rate is subsequently increased (as an increase in the corporate tax rate will increase the amount of tax saved by any tax losses). The amount of the new deduction is essentially the difference between: ▪ the amount of the cashed-out tax losses that would still have been available when the tax rate increased, and ▪ the amount of tax losses that would need to be cashed out at the new rate to produce the same tax credit as the above tax losses produced when cashed out at the old rate.  The amount of the deduction is calculated for each year in which an R&D loss tax credit was received using the formula: tax credits × (new rate − old rate) ÷ (new rate × old rate) where: tax credits is the total amount of the company’s R&D loss tax credits for years before the rate increases minus the total amount of: — the company’s terminal tax, plus tax credits giving rise to imputation credits, minus refundable tax credits giving rise to imputation debits, for the period beginning with the first year a R&D loss tax credit was claimed and ending with the tax year before the current year, and — payments of R&D repayment tax (discussed below) relating to the R&D loss tax credits before the current year new rate is the basic tax rate for a company after the rate increase old rate is the greatest of: — the basic company tax rate before the rate increase — the basic company tax rate for the latest year, before the current year, for which the person received a previous deduction under s MX 6, and — the basic company tax rate for the year in which the latest R&D loss tax credit arose (before the current year). Example 3: Hemantware Ltd researches new materials for sport shoes. The company cashes out $800,000 of tax losses in the 2016–17 income year when the company tax rate is 0.28 to receive tax credits of $224,000. The company tax rate changes to 0.30 for the 2017–18 tax year. Hemantware Ltd has a resulting deduction of $53,333 [$224,000 × (0.3 − 0.28) ÷ (0.3 × 0.28)] for that year. Example taken from Tax Information Bulletin Vol 