), EX 31–EX 43, EX 45  ¶26-130 Calculation methods of FIF income or loss Foreign investment fund (FIF) income or loss from an investment in a FIF is to be calculated according to one of the following calculation methods: ▪ the fair dividend rate method ▪ the comparative value method ▪ the cost method ▪ the deemed rate of return method, or ▪ the attributable FIF income method. Restrictions may apply to limit the adoption of some of the calculation methods. These are referred to below, as part of the  outline of each calculation method. A calculation method is adopted by its application in completion of the year’s return of income. A common method is to be applied to all interests in the same FIF unless the calculation method is not permitted for a particular FIF interest. Where a calculation method is not chosen, the fair dividend rate method is the default method if it is practical to use it and not prohibited for the FIF interest, otherwise the cost method is applied. A change between calculation methods is possible but it may result in a deemed disposal and reacquisition of the FIF interest. See ¶26135. The cost or market value of a FIF interest is determined in accordance with the rules set out at ¶26-140. FIF income or loss arises for FIFs held by a CFC that are not taken into account in calculating the net attributable CFC income or loss of the CFC. This is for the New Zealand investor who has an income interest of 10% or more in the CFC. The recognition of FIF income or loss does not apply if the CFC is a life insurer and its policyholders are actuarially attributed with the income of the FIF. Fair dividend rate method Under the fair dividend rate method FIF income is 5% of the market value of the FIF interest at the start of a tax year. The fair dividend rate method is the default method used to ascertain FIF income or loss, provided it is practical to use it and it is not prohibited for the particular FIF interest. For shares in a foreign company the fair dividend rate method is not applied where: ▪ it is not practical to apply the method because market value at the start of the income year can only be obtained by independent valuation (if so, the cost method becomes applicable) ▪ the share is a non-ordinary share (one with a guaranteed return), or ▪ another available calculation method is chosen. Since the fair dividend rate method applies to FIF interests held on 1 April it does not create FIF income for FIF interests purchased during  the income year (unless the purchase becomes a “quick sale” FIF). The fair dividend rate method also recognises “quick sale” FIF interests, ie FIF interests that are purchased and sold within the income year. The fair dividend rate method creates FIF income for 5% of the lesser of the cost of the quick sale FIF interest or the gain realised from the purchase and sale, with an ability to use average cost if a share reorganisation occurs during the holding period. An investor who is a natural person or the trustee of a family trust is able to readily change from year-to-year between the fair dividend rate method and the comparative value method. The change must be for all FIF interests and not just those FIF interests giving rise to lesser FIF income under the comparative value method. Several determinations have been issued by the Commissioner stating whether the fair dividend rate method may, or may not, be applied to particular FIFs. See, for example, Determination FDR 2014/02, made on 11 March 2014, which allows certain portfolio investment entity funds managed by New Zealand Funds Management Limited to use the fair dividend rate method to calculate foreign investment fund income from Civic Capital Currency Offshore Fund Limited for the 2014 and subsequent income years (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 4, May 2014, at 75). The provisions setting out the fair dividend rate method differ according to the classification of the investor. Section EX 52A specifies when the different methods are to be used. The annual method for the fair dividend rate method is set out in s EX 52. The periodic method for a unit valuer or another person who chooses to value an attributing interest on a daily basis is found in s EX 53. A unit valuer is a unit trust or other entity that makes investments for the benefit of investors, assigns an interest in net returns to the investors and determines the value of investors’ interests for a number of unit valuation periods during the course of the income year. Taxpayers can change between the annual and periodic fair dividend rate methods in calculating income from offshore investments no  more than once every four years for each FIF interest. Foreign currency hedges An optional rule effectively allows eligible taxpayers to apply the fair dividend rate to their foreign currency hedges, rather than the financial arrangements rules. Subpart EM provides for a tax calculation method for certain foreign currency hedges entered into for assets taxed under the fair dividend rate method or Australian Stock Exchange listed shares that are not subject to the FIF rules provided the sale of those shares would not be taxable. The rule is optional and eligible taxpayers are able to elect what hedges it will apply to and to what extent it will apply for each hedge (subject to maximums). The general result is that a reduction in value of the investment is able to be consolidated with the corresponding increase in value of the hedge so as to give a tax neutral result. The rule applies only to widely held entities, as such entities generally have muted incentives to take aggressive tax positions, investment mandates and other documentation that disclose investment strategies. Comparative value method The comparative value method is used to calculate FIF income or loss from shares in a foreign company where: ▪ the investor is a natural person or a trustee of a family trust who chooses to adopt the method, or ▪ the share is a non-ordinary share. The comparative value method of calculating FIF income compares the value of the fund at the end of the income year with the value of the fund at the start of the year. Adjustments are made for any contributions to, or distributions from, the fund. The difference is the FIF income or loss. This calculation takes into account any capital appreciation over the year. It also considers the effect of exchange fluctuations. Accordingly, New Zealand investors can be subject to tax even if the fund performs badly. Cost method  The cost method may be adopted for shares in a foreign company only where use of the fair dividend rate method is allowed but not practical because an independent valuation is necessary to ascertain the market value of the shares at the start of the income year. Under the cost method FIF, income is 5% of the cost of the FIF interest. The cost does not recognise income for the year of acquisition of the FIF. This is because there is no acquisition cost at the start of that year. Each year of retention of the FIF interest the cost base is increased by 5%. The cost method also recognises “quick sales”, being the purchase and sale of a FIF interest within the income year. The cost of the FIF interest may be reset every five years by an independent valuation. Deemed rate of return method The deemed rate of return method is applied to a non-ordinary share where use of the comparative value method is not practical because market value of the share at the end of the income year cannot be ascertained. Under the deemed rate of return method, FIF income is the book value of the FIF interest multiplied by a rate of return prescribed by regulation. The deemed rate of return for the 2019–20 income year was 5.05%, changed from 5.86% for the previous income year. Attributable FIF income method The attributable FIF income method may be chosen for a FIF where adequate financial information can be supplied to the Commissioner and one of the following applies: ▪ an income interest of at least 10% is held in the FIF as a foreign company and the investor is not a PIE, or ▪ the FIF is a CFC and: □ market value for the FIF at the start of the income year can be ascertained only by an independent valuation, and  □ the taxpayer, and any other investor with a direct income interest of 10% or more, is not a listed company, a group investment fund, a PIE, a superannuation scheme, a unit trust or trustee of a trust with one of those entities as a beneficiary. The attributable FIF income method is based on the CFC rules with certain modifications. There will be no FIF income or loss under the attributable FIF income method if the FIF is a non-attributing active FIF. A non-attributing active FIF is a FIF that conducts an active business so that attributable income (passive income, such as interest, rent or royalties), ascertained under financial accounting or tax measures of income, is less than 5% of gross income. If attributable income is more than 5% of gross income, only that passive income is FIF income. A person’s FIF income is determined by multiplying the net attributable FIF income by their income interest in the FIF (calculated under the CFC rules as if the FIF were a CFC). The exemption that would otherwise apply may be overridden by the taxpayer electing by notice to the Commissioner that the FIF shall be an elective attributing FIF. The possibility of obtaining greater deductions in the current or a future period might suggest the desirability of choosing elective attributing FIF status. Revocation requires the Commissioner’s consent with the election expiring automatically if the attributable FIF income method ceases to be applied (unless the FIF becomes a CFC for which an income interest of 10% or more is held). Further discussion of the attributable FIF income method can be found in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 6, July 2012 at 24. Law: IT07 ss CQ 6, DN 7, EX 44–EX 56, EX 58, EX 61, subpart EM  ¶26-131 Only FIF income or loss from FIF interest A person is generally treated as having no income or deductions other than FIF income or loss from a FIF interest where one of the cost-based methods is used. Any other amount derived is treated as excluded income. Although note a rebate of fees will be income if the  person was allowed a deduction for payment of the fees. For other income and deductions to be disregarded, the calculation method for FIF income or loss must be: ▪ the fair dividend rate method, unless the FIF is a company resident and taxable in Australia (not subject to exemptions for offshore business activities or offshore banking units) and the shareholding is a direct income interest of 10% or more (although that exclusion will not apply if the FIF is a foreign PIE equivalent and the taxpayer is a PIE, eligible to be a PIE or a life insurer) ▪ the comparative value method ▪ the cost method, or ▪ the deemed rate of return method (although there is additional FIF income to the extent that a gain upon disposal of the FIF exceeds total deemed rate of return FIF income). Law: IT07 ss CX 57B, EX 59, EX 60  ¶26-132 Change of calculation method under FIF rules Generally, a calculation method, once adopted, must continue to be applied for later income years. Restrictions constrain changing calculation methods. It is confirmed that a natural person or the trustee of a family trust may freely change from year to year between the fair dividend rate method and the comparative value method. A common method must be adopted for each year, so that selection of the comparative value method for some attributing FIF interests would preclude application of the fair dividend rate method to other attributing FIF interests. A change of calculation method is permitted by means of a notice to the Commissioner setting out the reasons for the change where: ▪ a natural person investor gives the notice of change on the ground that the market value of all attributing FIF interests at the  end of the income year before the year from the end of which the change takes effect is not more than $250,000 (with the notice also to be given by that date), or ▪ the change is to or from the attributable FIF income method, the first being able to be made freely with any second and subsequent change permissible only where: □ there has been a change in circumstances significantly changing the ability to obtain enough information to use the attributable FIF income method, and □ the alteration of an income tax liability is not the principal purpose or effect of the change. The notice of change to or from the attributable FIF income method must be given before the end of the income year that is the year of the change although the Commissioner is authorised to accept a retrospective notice. A change of calculation method may be permitted where it is no longer practical to continue with the current method. The change in method is permitted where changed circumstances for the current method arise because: ▪ fair dividend rate method: market value at the start of the income year can be obtained only by an independent valuation ▪ cost method: it becomes practical to use the fair dividend rate method once again ▪ comparative value method: the person is no longer trustee of a family trust, or it is impossible to ascertain market value at the end of the income year ▪ deemed rate of return method: use of the comparative value method becomes required (because year-end market value can be ascertained)  ▪ attributable FIF income method: the criteria permitting adoption of the method cease to be satisfied or it is impossible to obtain enough information to continue use of the method. Law: IT07 s EX 62  ¶26-135 Deemed disposal of FIF interest when change of calculation method Under s EX 63, there may be a deemed disposal and reacquisition of an interest in a foreign investment fund (FIF) when an investor changes the calculation method. A deemed disposal and reacquisition will occur when an investor changes calculation method: ▪ from one of the four cost-based methods (ie the comparative value method, deemed rate of return method, fair dividend rate method or cost method) to the attributable FIF income method ▪ from the attributable FIF income method to one of the four costbased methods ▪ from the fair dividend rate method or comparative value method to the cost method or deemed rate of return method ▪ from the cost method or deemed rate of return method to the fair dividend rate method or comparative value method, or ▪ from the comparative value method to the fair dividend rate method, or vice versa. For the first two changes listed above, the deemed disposal is taken to have occurred immediately before the start of the accounting period in which the new method is adopted. The disposal is also deemed to be for a consideration equal to the market value of the interest at that time.  For a person changing from the comparative value method or fair dividend rate method to the cost method or deemed rate of return method, there is a deemed disposal and reacquisition of the interest at market value at the beginning of the income year to which the new method applies. For a person changing from the cost method or the deemed rate of return method to the fair dividend rate method or the comparative value method, there is a deemed disposal and reacquisition of the interest at either the opening value at the beginning of the income year to which the new method applies (if changing from cost) or the closing book value for the preceding income year (if changing from deemed rate of return). For changes between the comparative value method and the fair dividend rate method, there is a deemed disposal and reacquisition of the FIF interest at its market value at the start of the income year to which the new method applies. Under s EX 66B there is a deemed disposal and repurchase of the attributing interest on the day an entity ceases to be a FIF. The consideration for the notional transaction is the market value of the interest at the end of the day of change in status. Law: IT07 ss EX 63, EX 66B  ¶26-140 Ascertaining cost and market value for FIF rules Cost When ascertaining the cost of property for the purposes of the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules, the following principles are applied: ▪ Subject to the rules for “quick sales” (see ¶26-130), the first-in first-out (FIFO) method of cost flow identification is to be applied where specific identification of cost is not possible because of multiple acquisitions and/or dispositions.  ▪ The cost of share purchases is pro-rated over shares acquired by share split, non-taxable bonus issue or similar event that is not an item of income on the basis of a fair allocation determined by reference to the relative market values of the existing and new shares. ▪ Expenditure or cost in kind is taken to be the market value of that expenditure or cost at the time incurred. ▪ The cost of a life insurance policy does not include previous premiums paid relating to term life insurance that do not increase the surrender value of the policy. ▪ Expenditure under the financial arrangements rules, interest and other holding costs are not included in cost. Market value The market value concept is defined in relation to a person’s interests in a foreign superannuation scheme or a life insurance policy. In the case of an entitlement to benefit from a life insurance policy, market value is the surrender value of the policy at the time in question. In the case of a foreign superannuation scheme, the market value of the interest is equal to the total costs incurred up to that time by or for the person on acquiring the rights if it is not reasonably practicable to calculate actual market value, and if the person has not derived any material gain from the rights up to that time. Inheritances Shares in a grey list company inherited before 1 April 2007, and so with a nil cost, are treated as having a cost equal to market value on 7 May 2012. The shareholding may subsequently enter the FIF rules, depending upon the availability of exemptions. If the shares are held on revenue account the increase in value, if any, between the date of acquisition by the inheritance and 7 May 2012 is taxable income. The income tax payable on the income may  be paid in three equal instalments starting with payment for the 2013–14 income year. Law: IT07 ss EX 67B, EX 68, EX 70  ¶26-142 Migrating companies and FIF rules A notional sale and repurchase at market value is treated as occurring on the day of migration when an attributing foreign investment fund (FIF) interest arises because a company migrates from New Zealand and becomes a FIF. There is a pro rata allocation of income or loss for the year of migration by the shareholder who uses the attributable FIF income method to calculate FIF income or loss. The tax rules that apply to the migrating company are outlined at ¶16-870. Law: IT07 s EX 66  ¶26-145 Deductibility of FIF losses A foreign investment fund (FIF) loss that is an allowable deduction arises from only some of the calculation methods. No FIF loss can arise under the fair dividend rate method or the cost method. The comparative value method may give rise to a FIF loss for the investor who holds a direct income interest in the FIF of at least 10% or in relation to a non-ordinary share (which is excluded from the fair dividend rate method). The attributable FIF income method that generates a FIF loss for an income year is dealt with according to whether the FIF is an elective attributing FIF: ▪ elective attributing FIF: the deduction allowed for the FIF loss is limited to same country attributed CFC income from an elective attributing CFC sharing a common commencement date of elective attributing CFC/FIF status  ▪ not an elective attributing FIF: the deduction allowed is limited to same country attributed CFC income plus same country attributable FIF income under the attributable FIF income method. Any unused FIF loss may be carried forward for deduction only from attributed income from the same jurisdiction. Law: IT07 ss DN 5, DN 8, IQ 2B, IQ 3  Foreign tax credits ¶26-250 Overview of foreign tax credits Where a New Zealand resident derives overseas income that is subject to New Zealand income tax, generally the person is allowed a credit in New Zealand for income tax paid overseas in respect of that income. In most cases, the credit is limited to the lesser of the actual overseas tax paid on the overseas income or the New Zealand tax applicable to the overseas income. No credit of tax is permitted for any unrecognised taxes specified in sch 27 of the Income Tax Act 2007. There are currently no entries in sch 27, which can be amended by Order in Council. The definition of “foreign income tax” includes foreign tax meeting the requirements of income tax under New Zealand’s domestic provisions and also foreign tax to which a double tax agreement applies. Where tax is imposed by another country on the basis of a person’s citizenship or domicile and that person is also a New Zealand resident, the person is not allowed a tax credit greater than that allowable, on the same income, to a New Zealand resident with no such link to the overseas country. The United States and the Philippines are two countries that impose tax on the basis of citizenship. All of the double tax agreements (DTAs) to which New Zealand is a party provide for the allowance of a tax credit. In most instances, the  credit article is subject to domestic law. If a credit for foreign tax is allowed under DTA, the amount of the credit is not to exceed New Zealand tax calculated under s LJ 5. See ¶26-255. If a company not resident in New Zealand is resident in another country under a double tax agreement, any dividend paid by that company is treated as being derived from a source in that country for the purposes of the DTA. With effect from 30 March 2017, the scope of this provision was extended so that it also applies to dividends paid by companies resident in countries with which New Zealand does not have a DTA. Under foreign tax credit anti-avoidance legislation, a foreign tax credit is denied where the taxpayer or an associate has received a refund or repayment of the foreign tax in whatever form. Commissioner’s statements IS 14/02 Inland Revenue (IR) has released an interpretation statement, IS 14/02 “Income tax — Foreign tax credits — what is a tax of substantially the same nature as income tax imposed under s BB 1?”: see ¶26-255. QB 14/12 IR has also released Question We’ve Been Asked QB 14/12, “Income Tax — Foreign tax credits for amounts withheld from United Kingdom pensions” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 11, December 2014 at 11), which deals with whether a New Zealand resident person can claim a foreign tax credit in New Zealand for amounts withheld in the United Kingdom from their pension payments. The item concludes that a person cannot claim a foreign tax credit in New Zealand for any amounts withheld by their United Kingdom pension provider from a United Kingdom pension. The basis for this conclusion is that a person can only claim a foreign tax credit if they have paid foreign income tax and, as the United Kingdom does not have the right to tax a pension payment that comes within art 19 of the relevant DTA made to a New Zealand tax resident, an amount withheld is not foreign income tax.  Note that the Commissioner has indicated that the principles outlined in the item will apply in other situations where New Zealand has the sole taxing right for pension income, for example, pension income derived by a New Zealand resident from South Africa. Operational position IR has also released an operational position that explains how to claim repayments from HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC), how to stop United Kingdom pension providers making deductions and, if necessary, how to change past New Zealand tax returns. If taxpayers have previously claimed a tax credit for tax withheld on a United Kingdom pension, IR suggests they should consider making a voluntary disclosure. If they are New Zealand tax resident and about to receive United Kingdom pension or annuity payments, to make sure they are not taxed further in the United Kingdom and to obtain a refund of amounts withheld in past years, IR recommends they complete Form New Zealand/Individual — Application for relief at source from United Kingdom Income Tax and claim to repayment of United Kingdom Income Tax, send the form to IR, and IR will process the form and send it on to HMRC. If a voluntary disclosure is made because tax credits have been claimed in the past, taxpayers will only be required to amend their returns to remove the foreign tax credit for the 2013 and 2014 tax years, provided they have not obtained refunds from HMRC for periods earlier than the 2013 year. IS 16/05 IR also released an interpretation statement, IS 16/05, “Income tax — Foreign tax credits — How to claim a foreign tax credit where the foreign tax paid is covered by a double tax agreement” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 12, December 2016 at 41). The item contains a flowchart that is intended as a useful framework for analysing a foreign tax credit issue. The item explains how the foreign tax credit rules work when a foreign tax is covered by a DTA. It also contains worked examples that illustrate some of the issues discussed. IR also released a Fact Sheet with the item that explains when the statement will apply and  advises taxpayers that they may need to obtain professional advice when claiming foreign tax credits. If a taxpayer has paid foreign tax that is not covered by a DTA, they should refer to IS 14/02 (see ¶26-255). BR Pub 20/01 to BR Pub 20/05 In June 2020, Inland Revenue released five public binding rulings, BR Pub 20/01 – BR Pub 20/05 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 32): ▪ BR Pub 20/01, “Dividends derived by New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company that is a foreign investment fund where the NZ investor holds foreign investment fund interests of $50,000 or less” ▪ BR Pub 20/02, “Foreign investment fund income derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company” ▪ BR Pub 20/03, “Attributed foreign investment fund income derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company” ▪ BR Pub 20/04, “Controlled foreign corporation income derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company”, and ▪ BR Pub 20/05, “Dividends derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company that is either a non-attributing active foreign investment fund or a controlled foreign corporation”. The rulings deal specifically with the ability of a New Zealand resident investor (NZ investor) in a United States limited liability company (US LLC) to claim a foreign tax credit (FTC), or other relief, for US federal income tax (US FIT) paid by them on their partnership share of the US LLC’s income. The ability depends on whether the US LLC is classified as under the foreign investment fund (FIF)  threshold, or as an FIF, or a controlled foreign corporation (CFC), and if the US LLC pays a dividend to the NZ investor. The rulings then explore the impact for different categories of FIF (AFIM/other methods/non-attributing active FIF) and CFC (attributing/nonattributing active). There is also an analysis of the operation of the relevant fiscal transparency and double tax relief provisions (arts 1(6) and 22) in the NZ/US DTA. A US LLC is a hybrid entity formed in the United States that has company and partnership characteristics. It is treated as a partnership for US FIT purposes. However, for New Zealand tax purposes, a US LLC is a foreign company and is a separate legal entity from its members. The rulings set out two circumstances in which an NZ investor is entitled to claim an FTC for US FIT paid by them and/or “relief” in terms of s CD 18 of the Income Tax Act 2007: ▪ Where the US LLC is a CFC or an FIF (and the NZ investor adopts the attributed FIF income method) and the NZ investor has attributed CFC or FIF income, the NZ investor may claim an FTC for any US FIT they pay on their partnership share of the US LLC’s income against their New Zealand tax liability on attributed CFC or FIF income. ▪ Where the NZ investor derives a dividend from the US LLC, they may deduct any US FIT they paid on their partnership share of the US LLC’s income from that dividend under s CD 18. The NZ investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the net dividend amount. Where the NZ investor is not subject to New Zealand tax on the dividend from the US LLC, then the relief provided by s CD 18 does not apply because the dividend is not taxable. This will be the case if the NZ investor is a company, because foreign dividends derived by a company are exempt income under s CW 9, and where the NZ investor adopts one of the following FIF income calculation methods: fair dividend rate, comparative value, cost method or deemed rate of return.  An NZ investor may also be entitled to relief under the New Zealand–US double tax agreement (NZ–US DTA). However, under the specific facts of the arrangements covered by the rulings, the specific articles in the NZ–US DTA dealing with relief from double taxation do not apply. The commentary to the rulings contains a number of detailed examples. IS 20/06 In July 2020, Inland Revenue released an interpretation statement, IS 20/06, “Income tax – Tax issues arising from ownership of foreign residential rental property” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 32, No 7, August 2020 at 98), which provides high level summaries of the various tax issues that can arise for New Zealand tax resident individuals who own foreign residential rental property (see ¶5-232). As part of the discussion, the statement considers a New Zealand resident’s entitlement to foreign tax credits for tax paid on income or gains from the foreign rental property in the country where the property is situated. The statement briefly considers whether a credit may be allowed under a relevant DTA or under subpart LJ and refers to IS 14/02 and IS 16/05 for further guidance. Law: IT07 ss LJ 1–LJ 3, LJ 7, sch 27; TAA s 225B  ¶26-255 Calculation of foreign tax credit Tax credits are available for foreign income tax paid. The tax paid overseas must have substantially the same nature as New Zealand income tax and includes forms of withholding taxes. Any penalties or interest charged by the overseas country are excluded. Credits permitted under this rule include those arising from foreign tax paid on a taxable distribution to a trust beneficiary who is resident in New Zealand. However, in this class of case, the credit is allowed only to the extent that the overseas tax paid is of a substantially similar nature to non-resident withholding tax (NRWT). Where income is determined over different balance dates, the tax credits for the New Zealand balance date of a person may have to be apportioned.  Australian company income tax paid by an Australian corporate limited partnership is available as a foreign tax credit to New Zealand limited partners of the partnership. Income tax paid in a state of the United States of America also supports a foreign tax credit claim. Inland Revenue has released an interpretation statement, IS 14/02 “Income tax — Foreign tax credits — what is a tax of substantially the same nature as income tax imposed under s BB 1?”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 5, June 2014 at 3. The statement sets out how s YA 2(5) should be interpreted and applied, and identifies the characteristics the Commissioner expects a foreign tax to have to be a tax of substantially the same nature as income tax imposed under s BB 1, as well the characteristics it must not have. The statement also considers the case law on “substantially the same nature as income tax” and the case law comparing taxes to income tax. The examples in the statement apply the test set out against Solomon Islands income tax, United States of America Federal Insurance contributions, and United Kingdom National Insurance contributions, concluding that a foreign tax credit is only available for Solomon Islands income tax, as the others are not a tax of substantially the same nature as New Zealand income tax. Maximum tax credit allowed against New Zealand income tax liability The maximum amount of foreign tax credits available for crediting against a taxpayer’s New Zealand income tax liability is determined by the formula in s LJ 5. Income from foreign sources is divided into segments according to the source, so that each attributing FIF interest is a separate segment (although all loan interest from a country is treated as one segment). Any prior year losses are carried forward to proportionately reduce all segments of current year income. The resulting net income for each segment is subject to a notional New Zealand income tax calculation at the taxpayer’s basic rate of tax, with the credit for foreign tax paid limited to that notional tax liability. If an associated entity of a working person pays tax overseas, the working person receives the tax credit for the foreign tax paid on the  personal services income attributed to them from the associated entity. The associated entity does not have a tax credit for foreign tax paid or withheld in relation to the attributed amount. Refund of foreign tax The appropriate adjustment to the tax credit must be made if a refund of the foreign tax or other benefit is received. If the refund is received after the tax credit has been taken into account, the refund amount becomes payable to the Commissioner 30 days after the later of the date of receipt of the refund or the date of the relevant notice of assessment. Law: IT07 ss LJ 2, LJ 5, LJ 6, LJ 7, YA 2(5)  ¶26-260 Foreign tax credit claim A foreign tax credit claim must be made within four years of the end of the relevant tax year (or six years at the Commissioner’s discretion), supported by appropriate information. Law: TAA s 78B  Double tax and other international agreements ¶26-280 Introduction to international tax agreements Double tax agreements A double tax agreement (DTA) is a bilateral agreement between New Zealand and another contracting state mainly recording an agreed position on the taxation of various persons and classes of income. A DTA follows a general format that adopts the “standard” provisions set out in a model DTA published by the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD). The standard provisions are subject to negotiated modifications, which usually are not extensive. An existing DTA may be supplemented by a subsequent protocol dealing with specific topics.  A DTA or protocol is negotiated between the Commissioner’s officials and appropriate representatives of the other contracting state. Once concluded the DTA or protocol is incorporated into New Zealand law by regulation. Under s BH 1(4) the DTA or protocol has an overriding effect, or is paramount over, other taxation law. See ¶26-285. The general theme of a DTA is to allocate taxing rights between the contracting states, comprising the country of source of the income in question and the country of residence of the taxpayer generating that income. The general proposition is that the country of residence of the taxpayer is treated as having the primary right to tax the income in question. That principle is modified to the extent that the nonresident taxpayer has a significant connection with the country of source. The DTA carefully defines the notion of residence in each of the contracting states to clarify who may obtain the benefits conferred by the DTA. “Tie-breaker” rules assist with the resolution of cases where there are close ties with each contracting state. The country of source may also be limited in the amount of tax it may impose on locally sourced dividends, interest and royalties. See further at ¶26-452 for an outline of the impact of DTAs on the taxation of those classes of income. The taxation of particular activities and persons is also addressed. The taxation of profits from ships and aircraft operated in international traffic is reserved to the country of residence. Income from the alienation of property, the exercise of employment and acting as a company director, pensions and sport and entertainment activities are additional topics normally included in a DTA. The position of Government service and students may also be addressed. A DTA normally contains non-discrimination provisions stipulating that a contracting state may not impose taxation requirements on nationals of the other contracting state that are more burdensome than those that are imposed on its own taxpayers. Discrimination on the grounds of residence, such as a higher rate of tax for a non-  resident, is not discrimination on the grounds of nationality and so may be permitted: C of IR v United Dominions Trust Ltd (1973) 1 NZTC 61,028 (CA). A DTA also deals with co-operation on administrative matters. A DTA generally authorises the exchange of information between the competent authorities of the contracting states. Accordingly, the Commissioner may exercise the power to access premises and obtain information as part of the DTA obligation to supply information when requested to do so by another contracting state: Avowal Administrative Attorneys Ltd v District Court at North Shore (2010) 24 NZTC 24,252 (CA). ▸ Note: In December 2020, Inland Revenue released the draft issues paper IRRUIP15, “Income tax – trusts and the Australian-New Zealand Double Tax Agreement”. The Commissioner has been asked to clarify the tax treatment of trusts under the network of double tax treaties that New Zealand has entered into with other countries. The focus of this issues paper is the access to the Australian/New Zealand Double Tax Agreement (Aus/NZ DTA) for trusts. It examines if a trust can access the benefits under the Aus/NZ DTA and how residency is determined for a trust. It then explores the Aus/NZ DTA’s accommodation of trusts as fiscally transparent entities to understand exactly what that means in the Trans-Tasman context for both trustees and beneficiaries. Finally, there is an analysis of the credit allowance provisions that provide relief for tax paid in the other jurisdiction. New Zealand has signed the multilateral “Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters” and it entered into force on 1 March 2014. The Convention provides for the exchange of taxpayer information between signatories. The Convention also provides for assistance in the recovery of tax owed to one of the signatory states. As such, the Convention overrides the common law rule known as “the revenue rule” by which the courts of one state were not available for assistance in the collection of tax owed to another state: Government of India v Taylor [1955] AC 491. The revenue rule had been displaced by agreements to the contrary, being the DTAs with Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada (revised agreement), Poland and Turkey.  Tax sparing provisions are currently incorporated into the DTAs with China, Fiji, India, Korea, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Singapore and Vietnam. The benefit of a tax sparing provision must be claimed using form IR 486. See ¶26-315. Note that in November 2016, the OECD released the text of a multilateral instrument negotiated between more than 100 jurisdictions. The “Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS” implements minimum standards to counter treaty abuse and to improve dispute resolution mechanisms while providing flexibility to accommodate specific tax treaty policies. It rapidly amends a worldwide network of several thousand bilateral tax treaties, rather than countries having to implement these amendments on a treaty-by-treaty basis. The New Zealand Government signed it in June 2017 and it was ratified in August 2018. It entered into force for New Zealand from 1 October 2018. Tax information exchange agreements Tax information exchange agreements (TIEAs) have become an alternative form of instrument to govern the exchange of information between contracting states, together with some additional matters. TIEAs are concluded with low tax jurisdictions mainly to permit and regulate the exchange of information on the financial affairs of residents of the other contracting state. See ¶26-320. Extradition Extradition for tax offences is governed by the Extradition Act 1999 or by a specific extradition treaty with another contracting state. The Extradition Act authorises extradition from New Zealand for an offence of a kind that, if committed in New Zealand, would be punishable under New Zealand law by at least 12 months’ imprisonment. Tax evasion, for example, is punishable by imprisonment for up to five years so that extradition may be obtainable for tax evasion committed in the requesting state. The procedures for processing an extradition request vary according to the identity of the requesting state.  New Zealand has concluded several extradition treaties. However, the Extradition Act does not require a foreign country to have a treaty to request extradition from New Zealand. Foreign account information-sharing agreement On 12 June 2014, New Zealand signed an inter-governmental agreement (IGA) with the United States to clarify the reporting obligations of New Zealand financial institutions under the United States law commonly known as the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) and also to create specific exemptions from reporting. FATCA requires all foreign financial institutions that are not exempted, including New Zealand financial institutions, to register with and report to the Internal Revenue Service regarding certain financial accounts held with them. Under the terms of the IGA, New Zealand financial institutions are required to collect information on their customers that are, or are likely to be, United States taxpayers. This information must be sent to Inland Revenue (IR), who in turn will transmit it to United States tax authorities under the existing exchange of information mechanism in the DTA between the two countries. The IGA also provides for reciprocal information to be sent from the United States to IR. Part 11B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) was inserted to explicitly authorise financial institutions to obtain and provide to IR the information that New Zealand is obliged to obtain and exchange under the IGA. The provisions deal with concerns that, in the absence of any specific change, financial institutions might not have been able to provide the relevant information to IR without breaching the Privacy Act 1993 or Privacy Act 2020. The provisions are generally drafted in a broad manner to accommodate the possibility of New Zealand entering into similar agreements with other jurisdictions in the future. FATCA requirements took effect from 1 July 2014. IR has released a number of forms and guides relating to the requirements of FATCA. OECD automatic exchange of information (AEOI) initiative  The OECD’s automatic exchange of information (AEOI) initiative is intended to set a global standard for sharing information with the objective of minimising tax evasion. Common Reporting Standard Under the AEOI standard, financial institutions are required to provide information on account holders’ financial assets to their local tax authority. The new rules are based on the US FATCA standard, although there are significant differences between AEOI and FATCA. The rules impose due diligence and reporting requirements on financial institutions, which includes banks, as well as a broad range of entities, including certain brokers, custodians, collective investment vehicles, managed entities and insurance companies. The rules are set out in an element of the AEOI standard known as the Common Standard on Reporting and Due Diligence for Financial Account Information (Common Reporting Standard or CRS). The CRS is supplemented by an OECD official commentary to ensure consistent interpretation and application of the rules. The CRS sets out rules to be imposed on financial institutions for: ▪ the conduct of due diligence on their non-exempt accounts to identify reportable accounts (broadly covering certain accounts held or controlled by tax residents from reportable jurisdictions) and undocumented accounts ▪ the collection of details of financial assets and income in relation to any reportable accounts that are identified, and ▪ reporting the information on reportable accounts and undocumented accounts to the tax administration in the jurisdiction in which the financial institution is located (to IR for New Zealand financial institutions). This information will then be exchanged with the relevant reportable jurisdiction. The Tax Administration (Reportable Jurisdictions for Application of CRS Standard) Regulations 2017, which came into force on 1 July 2017, provide for 58 territories to be reportable jurisdictions for the purposes of the CRS.  Financial institutions Financial institutions that are subject to CRS obligations in New Zealand are those that are resident in New Zealand (excluding branches located overseas) or that have branches in New Zealand. Residence is generally determined by where the institution is resident for tax purposes. However, the CRS has special residence rules for trusts and transparent entities. “Financial institution” is defined broadly, so the term “financial account” is defined to apply in the context of entities that would not normally be considered to be financial institutions. It extends beyond typical accounts, such as depository accounts, to include custodial accounts, cash value insurance contracts, annuity contracts, equity and debt interests. Accounts may also be defined as “excluded accounts” if the entities and accounts pose a low risk of facilitating tax evasion and otherwise satisfy other defined criteria. More stringent obligations apply to accounts opened on or after 1 July 2017, with self-certifications generally being required to be obtained by the financial institution on account opening. Financial institutions that maintain accounts held by passive nonfinancial entities (passive NFEs) will, as part of these procedures, need to “look through” those entities to determine the natural persons that are the ultimate controlling persons. In some cases, particularly for trusts, certain persons are considered to be controlling persons irrespective of whether they actually have or exercise control over the entity. The aim of the due diligence procedures is for financial institutions to identify accounts that are held or (for passive NFEs) controlled by foreign tax residents. Implementation The legislation included a phased implementation in New Zealand, with 1 July 2017 as the start date for financial institutions to conduct due diligence and reporting requirements on all new accounts. They were also expected to begin due diligence reviews of all pre-existing accounts from 1 July 2017. Due diligence of pre-existing high value  accounts (generally accounts with an account balance exceeding US$1m) had to be completed by 30 June 2018, with the due diligence of other pre-existing accounts to be completed by 30 June 2019. IR had to start exchanging information with other tax authorities by September 2018, in line with international requirements. The legislation incorporating the Common Reporting Standard and its Commentary into New Zealand law is primarily located in Pt 11B of the TAA, alongside the FATCA provisions. The legislation generally only introduces special rules when the Common Reporting Standard or Commentary either provides flexibility or requires implementing jurisdictions to make decisions (for example, decisions on dates that will apply for due diligence and reporting purposes). Penalties and record-keeping obligations Strong sanctions apply to financial institutions for intentional failure to comply or for failure to comply through lack of reasonable care. The penalties to be imposed on financial institutions are backed with specific obligations and penalties to be imposed directly on account holders, controlling persons or intermediaries that (i) provide false information or a false self-certification, (ii) fail to comply with a request for information or a self-certification, or (iii) fail to inform of any material change in circumstances that they are aware of relating to information or a self-certification that they have provided. However, these penalties are subject to the application of “no fault” and “reasonable efforts” defences. For further discussion of the penalties, see ¶14-048. Specific record-keeping obligations are also implemented, together with an anti-avoidance provision that applies to arrangements and practices entered into or by financial institutions, persons, or intermediaries with “a main purpose” of avoiding an obligation under Pt 11B. Low risk excluded entities and accounts The CRS allows implementing jurisdictions to expand on the list of automatically excluded entities and accounts to also include “low  risk” excluded entities and accounts. This means these entities would be excluded from due diligence and reporting obligations. To be considered a “low risk” entity or account, the financial institution first needs to meet the criteria set by the implementing jurisdiction. Entities and accounts will only be a low risk entity or account if they are approved by IR. Inland Revenue guidance IR has released a document entitled “Guidance on the Common Reporting Standard for Automatic Exchange of Information” (IR 1048, July 2019). This guidance is intended to provide operational advice in the New Zealand context for financial institutions that are implementing the CRS and others who may have CRS obligations. It includes references to specific parts of the CRS, the CRS Commentary (and the related OECD CRS implementation handbook, and the OECD’s answers to “Frequently Asked Questions”) that the reader may find useful. The guidance is intended to be a self-contained document that can be used by a wide range of taxpayers to clarify their CRS obligations. It contains a roadmap to assist taxpayers in identifying the part of the guidance that is most relevant to them. The Appendices to the guidance also contain a summary of various matters, including a comparison between FATCA and CRS, and the options that reporting New Zealand financial institutions can take when carrying out CRS due diligence and reporting. Further information on taxpayers’ obligations under the CRS, including links to a number of other guides, forms and reports about the AEOI and CRS, can be found on the Inland Revenue website at Automatic Exchange of Information and the Common Reporting Standard. Law: IT07 s BH 1; TAA Pt 11B  ¶26-285 Double tax agreements paramount to domestic law  The fundamental principle relating to double tax agreements (DTAs) is that they are paramount to the domestic law. This means that their provisions have effect notwithstanding the rules contained in the domestic law. Note, however, that an exception to this is the general anti-avoidance rule in s BG 1. A DTA will not have overriding effect with respect to s BG 1. Section BG 1 can apply to deny a tax advantage obtained from a tax avoidance arrangement, whether the tax advantage arises under domestic law or a provision of a DTA. Note that two further exceptions to the overriding effect of a DTA were inserted into s BH 1(4) in 2018. Under s RF 11C, New Zealand is able to charge NRWT on payments under certain cross-border hybrid financing instruments if New Zealand treats the payment as interest, overriding the DTA classification of the payments (see ¶26450). In addition, a DTA will not have overriding effect with respect to s GB 54, a specific anti-avoidance rule that deems a permanent establishment to exist in New Zealand in certain circumstances (see ¶26-300). The general approach of DTAs is to recognise that the country of residence enjoys the primary right of taxation of a taxpayer engaged in a cross-border transaction. For business profits, the country of residence retains the sole right of taxation unless the non-resident establishes a permanent establishment in the country of source. For dividends, interest and royalties the country of source may tax the income, albeit at limited rates, despite the absence of a permanent establishment in the country of source. Example: Japan Co leases barges to NZ Co so that the charter income paid to Japan Co has a New Zealand source. However, Japan Co neither has a permanent establishment in New Zealand nor is deemed to have one. New Zealand may not tax the charter income.  DTAs often provide that the use of substantial equipment in a contracting state under contract is a permanent establishment situated in that state, eg Australia as a state of source may tax  charter income from leasing of barges by a Singaporean resident: McDermott Industries (Aust) Pty Ltd v FC of T 2005 ATC 4398. Most DTAs prescribe a lower rate of tax than would otherwise apply under domestic law. For example, royalties paid to residents of Australia and the United States of America are taxed at the rate of 5% rather than the usual 15% rate. Usually any such limitation is expressed to apply to the extent that the payment is at an arm’s length level. Law: IT07 s BH 1(4)  ¶26-290 Interpretation of double tax agreements New Zealand courts have adopted an approach consistent with that outlined in the 1980 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, to which New Zealand is a signatory. The principles of public international law applicable to treaties, and their interpretation, are codified in the convention. The terms of a treaty are given their ordinary meaning in the context of the treaty and in the light of its object and purpose. The context of the treaty is extended, by art 31(2) of the Vienna Convention, to the preamble, annexes and agreements between the contracting parties. A double tax agreement (DTA) is part of a network of international agreements using international language, substantially similar in form and effect and designed to promote exchanges of goods and services and the movement of capital and persons in international trade by eliminating international double taxation. “The OECD Convention rules have an international currency used as they are by and in countries throughout the world and accordingly the language of the rules should be construed on broad principles of general acceptation and having appropriate regard to the Commentary and any travaux préparatoires”: C of IR v JFP Energy Inc (1990) 12 NZTC 7,176. Generally a private or public ruling is not available for DTA matters: see QB 08/03, “Application for a private ruling or product ruling on an issue dealt with in a mutual agreement made under a double tax  agreement — Tax Administration Act 1994, sections 91E(4)(d)(ii) and 91F(4)(d)”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 7, August 2008, at 20. DTAs have ambulatory and not static meaning so that a DTA may prevent the imposition of the capital gains tax introduced after the contracting states entered into the DTA: Undershaft No 1 Ltd v FC of T 2009 ATC ¶20-091.  ¶26-300 Meaning of “permanent establishment” Where a non-resident has a “permanent establishment” (PE) in New Zealand and the business profit is attributable to the PE, the relevant double tax agreement (DTA) will provide that the non-resident entity is subject to tax in New Zealand. (The reverse also applies: New Zealanders conducting business overseas will not have their business income taxed by an overseas Government if a relevant DTA exists, so long as they do not have a PE overseas.) A PE generally means a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on and is usually based on art 5 of the OECD Model DTA. This includes a place of management, a branch, an office, a factory, a workshop, a mine, a quarry, an oil or gas well, and an agricultural, pastoral or forestry property. The concept of permanency appears to underlie the meaning of a fixed place of business. Activities that are merely preparatory and that are auxiliary to a place of business — for example, using facilities for the storage, display or delivery of goods or merchandise — do not come within the ambit of a PE. Despite the absence of a fixed place of business, the DTA with Australia extends the permanent establishment concept to include services performed by an individual present in a contracting state for more than 183 days in a 12-month period, mineral exploration activities carried on for more than 90 days in a 12-month period and the operation of substantial equipment for more than 183 days in a 12-month period. An enterprise is also deemed to have a PE, and to carry on business through that PE, when substantial equipment is used “by, for or  under contract with the enterprise”. In McDermott Industries (Aust) Pty Ltd v FC of T 2005 ATC 4398 barges were held to be substantial equipment amounting to a permanent establishment. Rented rooms used to store documents were not a permanent establishment because no business was carried on from the rooms: Unisys Corporation Inc v FC of T 2002 ATC 5146. E-commerce E-commerce raises several questions about what does and does not constitute a PE, for example, whether having the ability to access a website in a country constitutes having a PE in that country; whether the presence of a server constitutes a PE; whether the presence of a virtual office constitutes a PE; and whether using an Internet service provider (ISP) in a country constitutes having a PE in that country. The OECD has concluded that human intervention is not a prerequisite for a PE to exist and further clarification of how this concept applies in the context of e-commerce has been included in the commentary on art 5 of the OECD Model DTA. Website The commentary to art 5 of the OECD Model DTA states that a website cannot, in itself, constitute a PE. Therefore, the taxpayer is not considered to have a physical presence in the foreign jurisdiction simply by the fact it has a website in that jurisdiction. Web server A web server is a computer on which the software and data that make up a website resides. A web server that is essentially an advertising site would be unlikely to trigger the PE provisions of a DTA because advertising is generally considered to be preparatory or auxiliary in nature. This activity is outside the scope of a PE. A web server that both presents information and records orders (or concludes contracts) may result in a PE in a country if it is leased or owned by the taxpayer in question. The question of whether the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on through such equipment needs to be considered on a case-by-case basis, having regard to whether it can be said that, because of such equipment,  the enterprise has facilities at its disposal where business functions of the enterprise are performed. Virtual office Some companies have their base in one location but operate in a number of other locations, using a variety of telecommunications technologies: cellular phones, laptop computers, video conferencing equipment and email. These virtual offices make it possible for entire projects to be carried out without the need for an office (in the traditional sense of the word) in that country. It is unlikely that a virtual office conducting business in New Zealand would be considered a PE under DTAs based on the OECD Model. The Model (on which New Zealand DTAs are based) requires the existence of a “place of business” and that this place of business must be “fixed”, thus it assumes that a physical presence is required. Internet service provider (ISP) An ISP is an entity that provides access to the Internet. There has been some suggestion that the location of a person’s ISP determines the jurisdiction in which that person can be said to be located. There has also been some discussion of whether an ISP can be said to be a dependent agent of the Internet user. The OECD, however, has since concluded that the ISP is an agent of independent status acting in the course of its business when it provides access to the Internet and facilitates a transaction. As an agent of independent status, the ISP will not trigger the PE provisions in respect of its principal (the Internet user). This conclusion was affirmed in the January 2003 update of art 5 of the OECD Model DTA. OECD and e-commerce In various papers published on e-commerce and taxation, the OECD has come to a number of conclusions that should assist enterprises carrying out cross-border Internet transactions. The conclusions include the following: ▪ A website on a server located outside a jurisdiction but capable of being accessed by persons in that jurisdiction does not give the website owner a PE or taxable presence in that location.  ▪ A website located in a jurisdiction that is non-interactive and merely displays advertising or other preliminary information will not usually constitute a PE. ▪ An interactive website that allows for the placing and fulfilment of orders may constitute a PE. However, if the server is moved about within the same country it will not constitute a fixed place of business and will not be a PE. ▪ A website in itself does not constitute a fixed place of business as it does not involve any tangible property. However, where the enterprise has control of the server by virtue of either ownership or rental of the server, the website could constitute a PE. ▪ A website is not an “agent” of the enterprise and therefore does not give the enterprise a PE. ▪ The use of an ISP does not constitute a PE. ▪ A primary issue, which is central to the notion of a PE, is the concept of a “business”. Whether a business exists is dependent on the activities of the enterprises in the foreign jurisdiction. Spasmodic activity that is not specifically targeted at the jurisdiction is not likely to constitute a business in that jurisdiction. Permanent establishment anti-avoidance rules Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) measures that strengthen the transfer pricing and permanent establishment rules to address BEPS strategies used by some multinationals were introduced in 2018. The OECD updated the definition of a PE in their model tax treaty and New Zealand adopted this into its DTAs by signing the OECD’s “Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS”. However, a domestic law change was needed to cover cases where the relevant DTA does not yet include the OECD’s new recommendations. As a result, a PE avoidance rule  was introduced into New Zealand domestic law. The rule deems a PE to exist in New Zealand for a non-resident if all the following criteria are met: ▪ the non-resident is part of a large multinational group (a group with at least font=Arial charset=unicode code=8364 descr='[euro]'750m of consolidated global turnover) ▪ the non-resident makes a supply of goods or services to a person in New Zealand ▪ a person (the facilitator) carries out an activity in New Zealand for the purpose of bringing about that particular supply ▪ the facilitator is associated with, or an employee of, the nonresident or derives 80% or more of the facilitator’s assessable income for the current and previous income years from services provided to the non-resident or its associates ▪ the facilitator’s activities are more than preparatory or auxiliary ▪ the non-resident’s income from the supply is subject to a DTA that does not include the OECD’s latest PE article or its equivalent ▪ the domestic PE definition contained in sch 23 does not apply ▪ income of the non-resident from the supply is not otherwise attributable to a permanent establishment in New Zealand of the non-resident, and ▪ a more than merely incidental purpose or effect of the arrangement is to avoid New Zealand tax, or a combination of New Zealand and foreign tax, for the non-resident. Under the rule the non-resident is deemed to make any supplies that are subject to the rule through that PE. The activities of the facilitator in relation to the supply are also attributed to the PE.  Thus, the provision deems the PE to exist for all the purposes of both the Income Tax Act and the applicable DTA, notwithstanding anything in New Zealand’s DTAs. The tax consequences of that deemed PE are then determined by the other provisions of the Act and the DTA. For example, New Zealand will have a right to tax the profits attributable to the PE under the business profits article of an applicable DTA. The anti-avoidance rule may also apply in the context of a third-party intermediary arrangement. This is a single arrangement under which the non-resident supplies goods or services to an unassociated New Zealand resident and the New Zealand resident on-supplies the goods or services to identified New Zealand customers who are known to the facilitator at the time of the facilitated supply. If the rule applies in these circumstances, then the facilitator’s activities give rise to a PE for the non-resident in respect of its supplies to the thirdparty intermediary. A source rule for PEs was also introduced. This rule provides that any income attributable to a PE in New Zealand has a source in New Zealand. For these purposes, a PE is defined as follows: ▪ Where a taxpayer is resident in a jurisdiction that has a DTA with New Zealand, the definition is the same as the definition of a PE in that DTA. It also includes any PE deemed to arise under the PE anti-avoidance rule (but only if the DTA does not include the OECD’s PE definition). ▪ Where a taxpayer is resident in a jurisdiction that does not have a DTA with New Zealand, the definition of a PE will be that set out in sch 23 to the Income Tax Act 2007 (the domestic PE definition). This definition includes the OECD’s PE definition. The application of these rules can be summarised as follows: ▪ If the jurisdiction where the non-resident is resident has a DTA with New Zealand, but that DTA does not incorporate the OECD’s PE definition, then the PE anti-avoidance rule applies to determine whether the non-resident has a deemed PE in New Zealand.  ▪ If the jurisdiction where the non-resident is resident has a DTA with New Zealand, and that DTA does incorporate the OECD’s PE definition, then the PE anti-avoidance rule does not apply. Instead the OECD’s PE definition in the DTA applies to determine whether the non-resident has a PE in New Zealand. ▪ If the jurisdiction where the non-resident is resident does not have a DTA with New Zealand, then the PE anti-avoidance rule does not apply. Instead the domestic PE definition (which incorporates the OECD’s PE definition) applies to determine whether the non-resident has a PE in New Zealand. In all the above circumstances, if the non-resident has a PE in New Zealand, then any income and expenditure attributable to that PE is considered to have a New Zealand source. Whether income and expenditure are attributable to the PE is determined under the standard PE profit attribution methodology applied by New Zealand under the business profits articles of most of its DTAs under s YD 5B. These changes apply for income years commencing on or after 1 July 2018. Guidance materials Inland Revenue released guidance materials, “BEPS — Permanent establishment anti-avoidance rules”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 22. The materials discuss each of the provisions in more detail and include examples. Law: IT07 ss GB 54, YD 4B, sch 23  ¶26-305 Double tax agreements negotiated New Zealand continues to enter into and renegotiate double tax agreements (DTAs). It is obliged to do this as a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). All New Zealand’s DTAs are reproduced in CCH, New Zealand Income Tax Legislation and CCH, New Zealand Double Tax  Agreements Law and Practice. New Zealand has concluded DTAs with: Australia  Indonesia  Singapore  Austria  Ireland  South Africa  Belgium  Italy  Spain  Canada  Japan  Sweden  Chile  Korea  Switzerland  China  Malaysia  Taiwan  Czech Republic  Mexico  Thailand  Denmark  Netherlands  Turkey  Fiji  Norway  United Arab Emirates  Finland  Papua New Guinea  United Kingdom  France  Philippines  United States of America  Germany  Poland  Vietnam  Hong Kong  Russian Federation  India  Samoa  Progress on the negotiation of DTAs is monitored by the Commissioner at www.taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz.  ¶26-315 Tax sparing provisions In an endeavour to stimulate foreign investment, tax sparing provisions (incorporated in DTAs) deem tax to have been paid, and to become a tax credit, in the country of residence, in relation to income from specified development projects.  New Zealand has tax sparing arrangements with the following countries: China, Fiji, India, Korea, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Singapore and Vietnam. A taxpayer who has claimed a foreign tax credit in respect of a tax sparing arrangement under a double tax agreement must file a tax sparing disclosure return (form IR 486). A separate disclosure return is required for each tax spared arrangement entered into.  ¶26-320 Tax information exchange agreements Tax information exchange agreements (TIEAs) have been entered into between New Zealand and: Anguilla  Dominica  Niue  Bahamas  Gibraltar  San Marino  Bermuda*  Guernsey  Sint Maarten  British Virgin Islands  Isle of Man  St Christopher and Nevis*  Cayman Islands  Jersey  St Vincent and the Grenadines  Cook Islands  Marshall Islands  Turks and Caicos Islands  Curacao  Netherlands Antilles  Vanuatu  * Indicates agreement signed but not yet in force. TIEAs generally provide for the exchange of information “foreseeably relevant” to the enforcement of domestic tax laws. A TIEA may authorise a tax examination permitting the representatives of one contracting state to enter the territory of the other to conduct interviews and examine records in a manner that is consistent with the domestic law of that other state. TIEAs usually follow a general model TIEA format. An additional agreement that concentrates on topics, including transfer pricing  adjustments, pensions, students and Government service, may also be concluded. TIEAs of the latter kind have been concluded, for example, with the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the Cook Islands, the Isle of Man, Jersey and St Christopher and Nevis. Note that with New Zealand’s signing of the OECD’s “Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS” on 8 June 2017, TIEAs are no longer needed and further negotiations for additional TIEAs have ceased. Law: IT07 s BH 1  TAXING NON-RESIDENTS IN NEW ZEALAND ¶26-400 Introduction to taxation of non-residents in New Zealand A person resident in New Zealand or a non-resident who has income from New Zealand is subject to the Income Tax Act 2007 and the Tax Administration Act 1994 and must satisfy the obligations, if any, imposed by those Acts. Possible obligations imposed by those Acts may be modified by the operation of a double tax agreement (DTA) creating an exemption from New Zealand tax. Income from personal services performed in New Zealand by a nonresident is subject to the possibility of an exemption from New Zealand income tax under domestic law (see ¶26-420) or under a DTA (see ¶26-425). A more specific exemption is available to nonresident crew members of pleasure yachts visiting New Zealand (see ¶5-640), while wages paid to a non-resident seasonal worker are subject to a final withholding of 10.5%. In the absence of an exemption, the employer of the non-resident may attract PAYE tax deduction obligations. Business profits derived by a non-resident from New Zealand are subject to New Zealand income tax, subject to the possibility of exemption in accordance with a DTA. In the absence of DTA  protection, the income generating the profits may be classified as a schedular payment subject to a withholding regime. Gains upon disposal that are realised by a non-resident equity investor may be exempt from income tax under domestic law. The income of a non-resident derived from New Zealand in the form of dividends, interest or royalties may be classified as non-resident passive income subject to the withholding (deduction) of nonresident withholding tax (NRWT). A DTA may affect whether a withholding is required and, if so, the rate of NRWT. Rental income derived from New Zealand by a non-resident is reportable in an annual tax return. Gains from the disposal of New Zealand land are subject to the possibility of taxation under the general rules for the taxation of land sale profits. A distribution as dividends of land sale gains realised by a New Zealand company may be taxable under the NRWT regime. A DTA may permit a sale of shares of a land-rich company to be treated as if it was a sale of the underlying land. This would enable the taxation of the sale of the shares by the contracting state hosting the land. With effect from 1 July 2018, an item of income of a non-resident is deemed to have a New Zealand source under our domestic legislation if New Zealand has a right to tax that item of income under a DTA. The exception is if the income is a dividend from a share in a foreign company that is not revenue account property of the non-resident. This rule aims both to simplify the test for determining whether an item of income has a source in New Zealand, and to ensure that all items of income New Zealand is entitled to tax under a DTA are taxable under domestic law. Law: IT07 s YD 4(2), (4), (17C), (17D)  ¶26-410 Collecting tax from large multinational group members  With effect from 27 June 2018, Inland Revenue can collect tax owed by a member of a large multinational group from any wholly-owned New Zealand resident group member or member with a permanent establishment in New Zealand in the event the non-resident company fails to pay its tax. The local group member is treated as an agent for the non-resident member that owes the tax. A large multinational group is defined to include multinational groups that exceed the revenue threshold of font=Arial charset=unicode code=8364 descr='[euro]'750m of consolidated global turnover. This threshold is based on the revenue threshold set in the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines. Law: IT07 ss HD 30, YA 1  Personal services income ¶26-420 92-day rule for personal services income Foreign-sourced income of non-residents is not assessable income under s BD 1(5)(c). Income derived from personal or professional services performed by a non-resident who is present in New Zealand for a period of less than three months will usually be exempt from income tax where: ▪ the visit does not exceed 92 days (counting arrival/departure days as whole days in New Zealand — see s YD 1(8)) ▪ the total of all visits to New Zealand during any 12-month period do not exceed 92 days (Note that for visits beginning before 1 April 2017 this test was 92 days in the tax year. This meant a taxpayer could arrange for their visit to straddle 31 March and remain in New Zealand for up to 182 consecutive days within a 12-month period without becoming a New Zealand resident, and also be exempt on personal services income derived from New Zealand during this period. This was inconsistent with other count tests contained in  legislation and New Zealand’s double tax agreements and was therefore changed with effect from 1 April 2017.) ▪ the services are performed for or on behalf of a non-resident ▪ the income is subject to an income tax in the country of residence, and ▪ the income is not that of a public entertainer, (eg a theatre, movie, television or radio artiste, a singer, musician, dancer, lecturer, circus performer, boxer, wrestler, athlete or other professional sportsperson). Public entertainer is defined in s CW 19(3). Example 1: Ms Smith visited New Zealand for 103 days from 2 April 2017 to 13 July 2017. As the total duration of the visit exceeded 92 days there is a liability to tax on all income derived in New Zealand.  Example 2: Mr Smith visited New Zealand three times. On his first visit he stayed for 103 days from 2 April 2017 to 13 July 2017. He visited New Zealand again for 40 days from 1 October 2017 to 9 November 2017. He then returned to New Zealand for 45 days for his final visit on 1 August 2018 to 14 September 2018. There is a liability to tax on income derived during the first visit (see previous example above). There is also a liability to tax on income derived during the second visit, even though the duration of the visit was less than 92 days, as the total number of days spent in New Zealand during the 12-month period including both visits exceeded 92 days. There is no liability to tax in respect of income derived during the third visit as the duration of the visit was 45 days (ie less than 92 days) and the total number of days spent in New Zealand during the 12-month period including the visit was also less than 92 days (45 + 40 = 85 days) — see table below. Visit  1st visit  Dates of visit  No of days in visit  Visits in 12month period  Total days in 12-month period  2 April 2017– 13 July 2017  29 days + 31 days + 30 days + 13 days = 103 days  1st visit  103 days  2nd visit  1 October 2017–9 November 2017  31 days + 9 days = 40 days  1st and 2nd visit  143 days  3rd visit  1 August 2018–14 September 2018  31 days + 14 days = 45 days  2nd and 3rd visit  85 days  A double tax agreement may operate to provide a non-resident with an exemption from New Zealand income tax on income derived from personal services. See ¶26-425. Under s HD 27(1) an employer who employs a non-resident with an income tax liability is treated as an agent in relation to the employment income derived in New Zealand by the non-resident person. If the person does not meet their income tax liability, the employer must withhold the amount of income tax payable from their employment income and pay it to Inland Revenue (IR) on behalf of the non-resident. See ¶26-430 for discussion on PAYE requirements of non-resident employers. A non-resident trader who employs a person in New Zealand is treated as an agent with respect to that person’s employment income. If the trader has an agent in New Zealand, the agent must meet the trader’s obligations under s HD 3 (see ¶2-036). Refer to s HD 27(2). A non-resident seasonal worker employed under the recognised seasonal employment instructions or the foreign crew of fishing vessels instructions is treated as a non-resident and is subject to a 10.5% PAYE tax deduction rate on wages and not required to file an annual tax return. Impact of COVID-19 virus on short-term visits IR has acknowledged that the COVID-19 pandemic may result in individuals breaching the 92-day threshold under s CW 19 due to travel restrictions. However, IR has stated that the inability of an individual to leave New Zealand due to COVID-19 will not affect the  exemption provided that the individual leaves New Zealand within a reasonable time once they are no longer practically restricted from travelling. Any additional days spent in New Zealand when they were unable to leave will be disregarded. Example 3: Peter was providing IT consulting services on behalf of his overseas-based employer while present in New Zealand to assist a related business. Peter pays tax on his income in his home jurisdiction. It was intended that his stay would be for 70 days, but he has become stranded in New Zealand. For the purpose of the 92-day test he will remain fixed at the day count as it was from when he was unable to leave New Zealand up to, and including, the day when he departs. So long as Peter leaves New Zealand within a reasonable time after he is no longer practically restricted from travelling, his income remains exempt even though he has stayed longer than 92 days. Peter plans to leave as soon as he is able. Example from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 23 April 2020  Law: IT07 ss BD 1(4), (5)(c), CW 19, HD 27, YD 1(8), (11), sch 2  ¶26-425 Exemption under double tax agreement for personal services income A double tax agreement (DTA) may operate to create an exemption from New Zealand income tax for income from personal or professional services that is otherwise taxable under New Zealand domestic law. Non-resident employee — 183-day rule Commonly a DTA contains an exemption for a non-resident employee who is not personally present in New Zealand for more than 183 days in the tax year or for a 12-month period, as the case may be. The terms of the exemption usually require that the income is taxable in the employee’s home country, that the employee’s employer is resident in that same home country and that the income is not borne by a permanent establishment or fixed base of the employer in New Zealand.  For example, under art 14 of the Double Taxation Relief (Australia) Order 2010 (the Australia–New Zealand DTA) the income of an Australian resident working in New Zealand is not taxable in New Zealand providing the following criteria are satisfied: ▪ The Australian individual is present in New Zealand for no more than 183 days (in total) during any 12-month period. ▪ The income is paid by an employer who is not resident in New Zealand. ▪ The income is not deductible in determining the taxable profits of a permanent establishment or a fixed based that the employer has in New Zealand. ▪ The income is taxable in Australia. A New Zealand resident working in Australia would have to satisfy similar criteria to gain relief under the DTA. Independent contractor A DTA may also contain an exemption from New Zealand income tax for the income of an independent contractor. The DTA may have provisions specifically allocating taxing rights on independent services income to the country of residence to the exclusion of the country of source. When considering whether a DTA provides relief, common issues that arise are: ▪ Whether the income is a royalty as defined in the DTA. ▪ If the non-resident contractor is an enterprise, whether it has a permanent establishment in New Zealand at the time the contract activity is performed. ▪ If the non-resident contractor is an individual, whether relief is provided by the personal services or the permanent establishment articles of the DTA.  Although DTAs have many similarities, they can and do differ, so relief provided under a DTA to a non-resident contractor from one country may not be provided under another DTA to a non-resident contractor from another country. In addition, a DTA invariably creates an exemption for business profits not attributable to a permanent establishment maintained in the country of source by the non-resident performing the services. For example, refer to art 7 of the Australia–New Zealand DTA. Both kinds of DTA exemption usually do not extend to public entertainers. Income from this kind of activity normally remains subject to New Zealand income tax on the basis that New Zealand is the country of source of the income. For example, refer to art 17 of the Australia–New Zealand DTA. Independent personal services income subject to New Zealand income tax may also be subject to a withholding tax regime. See ¶26-480 and sch 4, pt A of the Income Tax Act 2007.  ¶26-430 PAYE requirements of non-resident employers The Commissioner requires non-resident companies to deduct pay as you earn (PAYE) from the salary or wages of a non-resident employee, irrespective of whether he or she spends less than 92 days working in New Zealand, until the employee’s right to relief from New Zealand tax is established to the Commissioner’s satisfaction. Alternatively, the Commissioner may accept a bond or other form of security from an employer or a PAYE intermediary in substitution for any requirement to withhold PAYE. ▸ Note: In July 2020, Inland Revenue released a draft operational statement, ED0223, “Non-resident employers’ obligations to deduct PAYE, FBT and ESCT in cross-border employment situations”. The draft item states that a non-resident employer has an obligation to withhold PAYE from a PAYE income payment made to an employee only if:  ▪ the employer is subject to New Zealand tax because it has a “sufficient presence” in New Zealand, and ▪ the services performed by the employee are properly attributable to the employer’s presence in New Zealand. A non-resident employer may also have a fringe benefit tax or employer contribution superannuation tax liability for a benefit provided to, or a contribution made for, an employee in the same circumstances. A trading presence in New Zealand, a permanent establishment, a branch, or entering and performing contracts in New Zealand with employees based in New Zealand would all indicate that there is a sufficient presence in New Zealand. A sufficient presence will not exist if an employee has chosen, as a matter of personal preference, to carry out their duties in New Zealand where those activities have no connection to New Zealand and represent the employer’s only connection with New Zealand. An employee’s non-resident foreign sourced income will not be subject to PAYE as such income is not taxable in New Zealand. Similarly, income that is subject to relief under s CW 19 or a double tax agreement does not attract PAYE deductions. Law: IT07 s RD 23  ¶26-435 Tax equalisation payments Tax equalisation payments are designed to reimburse expatriate employees for the difference between: ▪ hypothetical home country tax, calculated on the total remuneration from employment and “outside” income, and ▪ actual income tax payable, calculated on home country equivalent remuneration, “outside” income and taxable allowances.  Most tax equalisation schemes are operated through accounts opened for each employee. The credits (or payments in) to each account comprise the hypothetical tax figure in monthly instalments and a final adjustment payment (tax equalisation credit). The payments out are New Zealand tax instalments. If employees do not actually receive equalisation payments until the year after that to which the payments relate, there are no pay as you earn (PAYE) obligations on the part of an employer in the year to which the payments relate. The PAYE obligations arise in the following year. Example: A subsidiary of a United States company agreed to pay non-resident employees working in New Zealand a net income equivalent to the net income that they would have received had they been working in the United States. The High Court found that the employees did not derive the difference between the two sums until the end of the income year in which the employer paid the estimated tax. The final amount of tax could not be ascertained until that time. The final credit received by an employee when leaving employment in New Zealand was taxable in New Zealand in the year it was made. See Dow Chemical Overseas Management Co Ltd v C of IR (1994) 16 NZTC 11,143.  ¶26-438 Income tax exemption for foreign equity investor Exempt income includes amounts derived from the sale or other disposal of shares and similar interests in unlisted New Zealandresident companies by non-resident investors who meet specified criteria and who, because they are exempt from tax in their countries of residence, cannot claim a tax credit for New Zealand tax paid. The exemption is aimed at a non-resident venture capital investor (including a limited partnership) who makes an equity investment in an unlisted New Zealand company on revenue account because the shareholding is acquired for resale or the proceeds of sale are business income. Any gain from sale of the shares may be exempt from New Zealand income tax without the necessity to ascertain if treaty relief is available.  Scope of the exemption The requirements of the exemption are: ▪ the non-resident acquires shares, share options or convertible notes that are held for at least 12 months ▪ the shares are not listed on a recognised exchange at some time in the 12-month period from time of purchase ▪ the New Zealand company does not have as its main activity any one or more of the following: □ land development □ land ownership □ mining □ financial services □ insurance □ building or acquiring public infrastructure assets, or □ investing with a main aim of deriving investment income in the form of interest, dividends, rent or personal property lease payments that are not royalties [Note that if the New Zealand company provides debt or equity funding to other companies as its main activity, there are further restrictions to be satisfied under s CW 12(3). That subsection accommodates venture capital investments made through a holding company that reinvests the funds in another company and allows some commercial flexibility.] ▪ the non-resident is a qualifying foreign equity investor, being one or more of: □ a foreign exempt entity  □ a person who is part of a foreign exempt partnership, and □ a foreign exempt person. The categories of a qualifying foreign equity investor are closely defined to ensure only the intended recipients of the exemption are included within its scope. In very broad terms, an investor must be resident in an approved territory and exempt from tax in its territory on the income. Under the Income Tax (Approved Territories for Qualifying Foreign Equity Investor Definition) Orders 2004, 2006 and 2008, all New Zealand’s double tax agreement partners have been approved for the purpose of s CW 12, with the exceptions of the Czech Republic, Hong Kong, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Switzerland, Turkey and Vietnam. The list of approved territories can be varied at any time. Law: IT07 s CW 12  Non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) ¶26-440 Introduction to non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) Dividends, interest and royalties derived from New Zealand by a non-resident are classified as non-resident passive income. As such, the income may be subject to the deduction of non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) by the payer. The non-resident is deemed to have received the NRWT withheld. An alternative to the deduction of NRWT from interest is the payment of the 2% approved issuer levy (AIL) as a form of stamp duty. AIL may be paid by the New Zealand borrower following an election by the borrower to do so (see ¶30-300). There is an exemption from both AIL and NRWT for interest paid on listed, widely-held bonds. Interest derived by a non-resident with a fixed establishment in New Zealand is not subject to AIL or NRWT.  Dividends that are fully imputed may attract a 0% rate of NRWT under New Zealand domestic law. Dividends for NRWT purposes include the distribution of capital gains to a corporate, associated non-resident shareholder. The foreign investor tax credit regime provides for the payment of a supplementary dividend, together with a tax credit for the New Zealand company, for dividends paid to a non-resident portfolio shareholder. A double tax agreement (DTA) is an important influence on the deduction of NRWT and the amount of the deduction. The DTA may exempt an item of non-resident passive income from NRWT or reduce the NRWT rate set out in domestic law. The interaction of DTAs and domestic law is described further at ¶26-450. The NRWT deducted must be paid to the Commissioner on a monthly basis. The NRWT is likely to be a final New Zealand tax for the non-resident in most cases. Law: IT07 subpart RF  ¶26-450 Non-resident passive income Non-resident passive income comprises income derived from New Zealand by a non-resident that consists of: ▪ dividends (other than investment society dividends) ▪ royalties ▪ interest (unless the non-resident is carrying on business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment, or the non-resident is a registered bank engaged in business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment lending to a non-associated borrower) ▪ investment society dividends (unless the non-resident is carrying on business here through a fixed establishment), or ▪ non-resident financial arrangement income (see ¶26-470). Non-resident passive income does not include:  ▪ exempt income (eg the investment income of a non-resident registered as a tax charity) ▪ certain interest related to an inflation-indexed instrument ▪ listed PIE dividends that are excluded income, and ▪ amounts derived by a trustee of a trust after the effective date of an election under s HC 33 for the trust (see ¶25-365). Interest that is non-resident passive income is subject to NRWT on a payment basis. The income is not ascertained in accordance with the spreading method applied for the purposes of the financial arrangements rules, except to the extent the amount is non-resident financial arrangement income or an amount to which subpart FG (Treatment of notional loans to New Zealand branches of foreign banks) (see ¶30-322) applies. NRWT is imposed on the gross amount of non-resident passive income. No deductions are permitted for any expenses incurred in gaining or producing the income. See Fleming v C of IR (1983) 6 NZTC 61,517. Dividends Dividends with credits attached For NRWT purposes, the amount of any dividend paid to a nonresident does not include the amount of any imputation credits attached to the dividend. The imputation credits may support a 0% rate of NRWT (see ¶26-452) or a foreign investor tax credit for the New Zealand company. Supplementary dividends paid under the foreign investor tax credit regime are subject to the deduction of NRWT. See ¶26-500. Dividends on liquidation or corporate migration The notion of what is a dividend is extended for NRWT purposes to include a distribution on liquidation, or a deemed liquidation distribution under the corporate migration rules, of capital gains paid to an associated corporate non-resident shareholder.  Non-cash dividends A deduction of NRWT is not made in relation to taxable bonus issues and non-cash dividends paid to a non-resident, but instead the payer of the dividend makes a payment to Inland Revenue of an amount equivalent to such a deduction. Royalties A royalty is payment made as consideration for the use or supply of certain types of property, particularly intellectual property. The definition of royalty in the Act is fairly comprehensive, but it is not exhaustive and therefore it is possible that additional items not specifically listed in the definition could come within its meaning — if such items are within its natural and ordinary meaning. An example of a royalty is a payment to an overseas franchisor for the right to use a trade name, a formula or process. Interest For the purposes of ascertaining non-resident passive income, “interest” is broadly defined to include every payment received by the lender in respect of the money lent with the exception of repayment of the principal sum. Interest can include a redemption payment, being the amount paid by a person on the redemption of a commercial bill to the extent that it exceeds the money lent. The concept of money lent does not include the amount the person paid for the bill, ie it is the amount paid by any person for the issue of the bill. Interest does not include fees which the borrower pays for professional services that are performed in arranging or managing the loan transaction, ie interest would not include fees such as legal fees, management fees, procurement fees and brokerage. The definition of “interest” in the Act applies unless otherwise modified by a double tax agreement (DTA). Some DTAs may contain a different definition or exempt certain interest payments. The inflation-indexed component of an inflation-indexed instrument is treated as being non-resident passive income at the time the coupon interest is paid. This ensures that non-resident withholding tax is deducted at the same time.  The NRWT rules generally apply on a payments basis. There is an exception for interest accrued on a cross-border loan between associates. It is recognised that the loan arrangement for the payment of interest may incorporate a significant deferral of the payment of interest, and consequently the accompanying NRWT liability, compared with deductibility of the interest expense for the New Zealand borrower. If so, NRWT may be imposed in relation to the accruing interest. NRWT becomes imposed where a loan classified as a related-party debt gives rise to income able to be designated as non-resident financial arrangement income. See further at ¶26-470. Gross-up clauses Often, a non-resident lender may wish to protect itself from the monetary effects of NRWT by providing for a “gross-up” clause in the loan agreement whereby the borrower is responsible for meeting the cost of the NRWT liability. The New Zealand borrower who pays gross interest and later ascertains that NRWT needs to be paid can recover the NRWT from the non-resident lender. In Tag Pacific Ltd v The Habitat Group Ltd (1999) 19 NZTC 15,069 (CA) a non-resident lender unsuccessfully relied on a settlement agreement in an attempt to resist reimbursement of the resident borrower. Example: Non-resident passive income of $170,000 is paid net of tax where a 15% NRWT rate applied. The gross amount of non-resident passive income is calculated as follows: $170,000 ÷ (1 − 0.15) = $200,000. The NRWT is: $200,000 × 15% = $30,000.  Approved issuer levy NRWT reduces to a 0% rate where 2% approved issuer levy (AIL) is paid in relation to the interest paid by a New Zealand borrower. The AIL alternative is not available where the interest is paid between associates. See further at ¶30-300.  New Zealand branch The onshore branch exemption has been narrowed so that it only applies to interest payments derived by the New Zealand branch of a non-resident, ie a non-resident with a fixed establishment in New Zealand does not derive non-resident passive income only if interest is derived from money lent by that New Zealand branch. Consequently, if money lent by the non-resident occurs outside of the scope of New Zealand branch activities, interest derived from the loan is subject to NRWT. Branch interest income would be subject to income tax. The exception to the narrowing of the onshore branch exemption is that the New Zealand branch of a non-resident registered bank is not subject to NRWT on the interest derived from money lent to a nonassociated borrower. Note that the changes to the regime for interest derived from New Zealand by a non-resident with a New Zealand branch apply to financial arrangements entered into after 30 March 2017. For financial arrangements entered into before 30 March 2017, there may be a five-year deferral of commencement of the revised regime. The deferral was available for a member of a New Zealand banking group and the trustee of a securitisation trust lending to nonassociates. If the deferral applies, the revised regime for New Zealand branches applies as from the 2022–23 income year. ▸ Note: Negative interest payments In November 2020, the Commissioner confirmed in a draft Question We’ve Been Asked, ADV000097, “Whether ‘negative interest’ payments are subject to withholding taxes”, that negative interest payments cannot be said to be paid for money lent and are therefore not subject to withholding taxes. See further at ¶15-040. NRWT on hybrid arrangements — treaty issue Section RF 11C deals with a hybrid mismatch issue that arises in the following circumstances: The New Zealand PE of a non-resident company borrows money from another non-resident in the same overseas jurisdiction as the  corporate headquarters of the PE. This occurs under a hybrid instrument that New Zealand treats as debt but the other country treats as shares. Under our DTAs, New Zealand is able to charge NRWT on interest payments made by a non-resident’s New Zealand PE to another non-resident. However, New Zealand is not able to charge NRWT on dividends paid by one non-resident company to another (regardless of whether the dividends are connected with a PE in New Zealand). This means that whether New Zealand can charge NRWT on payments under a hybrid financial instrument in these circumstances depends on whether the payments are classified as interest or dividends for DTA purposes. Inland Revenue’s view has been that New Zealand can charge NRWT on the payments. This is on the basis that the source state’s (that is, New Zealand’s) classification of the payment determines its tax treatment under the DTA. However, a question had been raised as to whether this view was correct. Section RF 11C clarifies the issue. The provision inserts a hybrid mismatch rule allowing New Zealand to charge NRWT on payments under certain cross border hybrid financing instruments if New Zealand treats the payment as interest. This rule overrides our double tax agreements (DTAs). The rule applies retrospectively from 1 April 2008. However, a savings provision was available where taxpayers had already adopted the position that NRWT or approved issuer levy was not payable in respect of such cross border interest payments made before 6 December 2017 (the date of the introduction of the legislation). Law: IT07 ss CC 9, RF 2, RF 11C, YA 1  ¶26-452 Rates of NRWT Ascertaining the rate of non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) applicable to a payment of non-resident passive income may be a two-step process. The domestic law provides for rates of 30% and 15% and, in addition, may reduce those rates to 0% in certain circumstances. The NRWT rate set by the domestic law is subject to  the possibility of a double tax agreement (DTA) creating an exemption from NRWT or reducing the rate otherwise applicable. NRWT rates under domestic law for the different classes of nonresident passive income are the following: ▪ dividends: □ 0% to the extent to which a non-cash dividend is fully imputed □ 0% to the extent to which a fully imputed dividend is paid to a shareholder holding: — a direct voting interest of 10% or more in the New Zealand company — a direct voting interest of less than 10% in the New Zealand company where a DTA would otherwise reduce the NRWT rate to less than 15% □ 15% to the extent that the dividend is: — fully imputed, or — a supplementary dividend, or — an investment society dividend, or — a payment of a fully imputed dividend and related supplementary dividend derived by a foreign investment PIE and distributed to a notified foreign investor (NFI) □ the post-treaty tax rate, if applicable, on the non-imputed portion of the dividend □ 30% in other cases ▪ interest: □ 0% where:  — 2% approved issuer levy (AIL) is paid by the borrower to a non-associate (unless a beneficiary under a loan enforcement trust), or — the interest is paid on listed, widely-held bonds, or — the interest is paid by a transitional resident to a nonassociate on money borrowed while non-resident that does not relate to a business carried on through a fixed establishment in New Zealand □ 15% in other cases ▪ royalties: 15%. In June 2017, Inland Revenue released a QWBA, QB 17/07, “Resident and non-resident withholding taxes: non-cash dividends” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 7, August 2017 at 8), which confirms that NRWT paid in accordance with the formula for calculating NRWT on non-cash dividends is included in the income of the recipient of the non-cash dividend. This has since been confirmed in the relevant legislation. A DTA may reduce these rates or, in some cases, create an exemption from NRWT entirely. For example, the DTAs with Australia and the United States of America exempt dividends where at least 80% of the voting power in the New Zealand company has been owned for at least 12 months by Australian and American, respectively, listed companies. A usual requirement for DTA modification is that the non-resident passive income is not associated with a permanent establishment in New Zealand. A DTA generally provides for the following maximum rates of NRWT on the different classes of non-resident passive income: ▪ dividends — 15% ▪ interest — 10% ▪ royalties — 10%.  Reduced NRWT rates under the DTAs with Australia and the United States triggered the most favoured nations provisions of the DTAs with Chile and Mexico to require matching NRWT rates on dividends and royalties paid to residents of those contracting states. Law: IT07 ss RF 7–RF 12  ¶26-455 Payment of NRWT A person who makes a payment of non-resident passive income must withhold the amount of non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) and pay it to the Commissioner. NRWT is payable to Inland Revenue (IR) by the 20th of the month following the month NRWT is deducted. With effect from 1 April 2020, the relevant investment income information must also be provided to the Commissioner. However, if deductions of less than $500 are expected to be made during the year, payments can be made in two instalments, on 20 October (for deductions made from 1 April to 30 September inclusive) and 20 April (for deductions made from 1 October to 31 March inclusive) each year. If payments exceed the $500 threshold, the taxpayer must revert to the monthly payment system, the first payment being due by the 20th of the month after the $500 limit has been reached. Before 1 April 2020, at the end of each year, an NRWT reconciliation statement, which balanced the NRWT owing on the interest, dividends and royalties paid with the NRWT paid during the year, had to be filed by 31 May. An NRWT withholding certificate also had to be filed by 31 May for each non-resident from whom NRWT was deducted. However, as part of the changes made to the reporting of investment income information, the requirement to provide an NRWT withholding certificate and annual reconciliation statement by 31 May was changed to require the information to be provided by 15 May from 1 April 2018 until the new monthly filing came into effect on 1 April 2020. Note, however, that this did not apply to payers of royalties, as the requirement of yearly reporting by 31 May remained in relation to royalties. Foreign currency  When NRWT is deducted in a foreign currency, the deduction should be converted into New Zealand dollars before being paid to IR. The legislation is silent on how/when the conversion should be made to New Zealand currency, but IR’s policy is that the conversion should be made at the exchange rate which applied on the day on which the non-resident passive income was paid. Cessation of activity A person who ceases the taxable activity giving rise to the nonresident passive income must remit all outstanding non-resident withholding deductions to the Commissioner by the 20th of the month following cessation of that activity. Before 1 April 2020, the taxpayer also had to file a reconciliation statement within 40 working days after the end of the month in which the activity ceased. Cease being resident Where a company ceases to be resident in New Zealand, NRWT payable on any deemed distributions to non-resident shareholders under the corporate migration rules must be paid, and the relevant investment income information provided, within three months of the date of emigration. The Commissioner has the discretion to extend the time for payment of any amount of NRWT. Payment to agent If a payment of non-resident passive income is made to an agent in New Zealand, the payer is required, at the time of making the payment, to advise that agent in writing of the amount of the NRWT which has been deducted. Should an agent in New Zealand receive a payment from which no deduction (or an insufficient deduction) has been made, that agent is required to deduct the requisite amount of NRWT at the time the agent receives the payment. With effect from 1 April 2020, the withholding and reporting obligations of custodial institutions have been clarified. The provision dealing with payment to an agent has been extended to include payment to a custodial institution.  In addition, a custodial institution is able to transfer its withholding and/or reporting obligations to another person or another custodial institution. For further discussion on the provisions concerning custodial institutions, see ¶15-187. Correction of errors With effect from 1 April 2020 (unless the payer chose to apply the new rules from 1 April 2019), changes have made it easier to correct errors in the following tax year when the payer has not deducted enough withholding tax. The changes mean that errors can still be corrected in the year that they occurred in, but they are also able to be corrected in the following year if they are under the threshold for error correction. Adjustments must be made by the next regular reporting date for the delivery of investment income information (see ¶26-457) if it is reasonably practical to do so. Errors can be corrected by deducting an amount from a subsequent payment to the payee made in the following year provided that the total tax being corrected is no more than the greater of $2,000 or 5% of the payer’s NRWT withholding liability for the year in which the error occurred. For example, if the payer paid $100,000 of NRWT in the year of the errors, NRWT errors of up to $5,000 could be corrected in the following year. Corrections made that meet these requirements are treated as having been made in time and as such are not subject to penalties or interest. Where tax has been withheld at a higher rate than it should have been, the excess amount can be paid to the recipient at any time before the 20th of April after the end of the tax year provided the payer has not already reported to the payee via a withholding certificate or dividend statement. Once the year-end information has been provided to the Commissioner, the additional tax credits are pre-populated into the recipient’s tax records and able to be refunded by Inland Revenue if it results in the recipient’s income tax being overpaid.  The error correction provisions have also been extended to cover non-cash dividends, allowing payers to make a correction by grossing up the payment for tax, provided any such adjustment meets the thresholds for corrections made in the following tax year. The Commissioner must be notified of any adjustments at the time they are made. The changes broaden the application of the error correction provisions and apply to all forms of income subject to NRWT. Law: IT07 ss RA 6, RA 11, RA 12, RA 15, RA 16, RA 18, RF 3, RF 4, RF 13; TAA subpart 3E, s 227E, sch 6  ¶26-457 Investment income information requirements from 1 April 2020 With effect from 1 April 2020, payers of interest and dividends are required to provide investment income information in electronic form by the 20th of the month following the month in which the income was paid. All investment income payers must file their information electronically, unless they receive an exemption from the Commissioner. Note that while the new rules have been compulsory since 1 April 2020, payers were able to choose to apply them from 1 April 2019. Subpart 3E of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA), ss 25B to 25R, codifies the requirements regarding information that payers of investment income must provide to Inland Revenue (IR). Investment income includes non-resident passive income (as discussed in ¶26450). The details of the particular investment income information to be provided are set out in sch 6 to the TAA. This differs depending on the type of investment income paid. A payer of interest (including interest on domestic debt subject to the approved issuer levy) or dividends is required to deliver investment income information to IR in electronic form by the 20th of the month  following the month in which the amount of investment income was paid to the payee: ss 25F and 25G. A person paying royalties to non-residents will continue to have to deliver the relevant investment income information to IR in electronic form by 31 May after the end of the tax year: s 25H. The Commissioner can grant an exemption from electronic filing. In considering whether to exercise her discretion, the Commissioner must have regard to: ▪ the capability of the investment income payer relating to the use of computers ▪ the nature and availability of digital services, including their reliability, and ▪ the costs involved with complying if they would be unreasonable in the circumstances. The Commissioner has to provide a statement of reasons for the exemption. Generally, the exemption remains valid until the Commissioner notifies the employer that it is to be cancelled, in which case it expires six months after the date given in the notice. However, the Commissioner can set a time limit on the exemption when it is made. Operational statement on exemption from electronic filing In February 2019, the Commissioner released an operational statement, OS 19/01 “Exemption from electronic filing” (see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 2, March 2019 at 3), which discusses the criteria for a person to be granted an exemption from filing electronically. The Commissioner will take into account the availability, and type, of connection to the internet and accepts that a person will need at least a broadband internet connection. The reliability of the connection will also be considered and the statement states that an unreliable internet connection will be a significant factor in granting an exemption. The Commissioner will consider whether the person has the necessary computer skills to be able to  use the digital technology and, if not, whether they have an employee, or can engage the services of someone, who is able to use the technology. Whether the person has some disability that affects their ability to use digital services will also be relevant. If a person uses a computer with an internet connection in their business or as part of their everyday affairs, the Commissioner considers it reasonable to expect they will have little difficulty in sending the necessary returns/information electronically. The question of costs will be considered by determining what is unreasonable in the circumstances of the particular person. The Commissioner accepts that the circumstances for some payers of investment income may be different to that of an employer or a registered person in that they may not necessarily be in business and are perhaps less likely to have a computer or any other means to connect to the internet. It is the Commissioner’s view that it would be unreasonable to expect such a person to incur the cost of buying a computer and connecting to the internet for the sole purpose of meeting the requirements of the legislation, and that an exemption would appear appropriate in such circumstances. Law: TAA subpart 3E, s 227E, sch 6  ¶26-460 NRWT is a final or interim tax NRWT may be a final tax or an interim tax according to the kind of non-resident passive income in question. NRWT as a final tax NRWT is a final tax for: ▪ dividends other than investment society dividends ▪ cultural royalties (being those royalties for the use or production of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work in which copyright subsists) ▪ interest or royalties derived by a non-resident life insurer electing to be resident in New Zealand  ▪ interest or investment society dividends where the parties are not associated, or ▪ interest when the payer is a member of a New Zealand banking group. NRWT as an interim tax NRWT is an interim tax for the following kinds of non-resident passive income: ▪ interest or investment society dividends derived by an associated person, and ▪ industrial and commercial royalties and payments for know-how. If taxation of the non-resident passive income on an annual assessment basis would produce a greater tax liability, the tax liability of the non-resident is increased to the larger amount (an unlikely outcome should there be deductible expenses available). However, the NRWT continues to be the only tax where the nonresident is a company that derives total income from New Zealand for the tax year not exceeding $1,000. No tax return is required to be filed if NRWT is the only tax on the non-resident passive income. Law: IT07 s RF 2(3)–(6)  ¶26-467 Assessment of NRWT A person deriving non-resident passive income from which no deduction has been made, or for which no payment of tax has been made, is liable to pay the requisite amount to the Commissioner. This amount is regarded as a debt payable to the Commissioner and may be recovered from the person who should have made the deduction or payment, as well as from the person deriving the nonresident passive income. If an amount of tax is chargeable and no one has paid the Commissioner, an assessment may be issued and  the provisions of the Act relating to income tax assessments apply accordingly. The Commissioner may make a refund when excess NRWT has been deducted, although sufficient evidence must be provided. A person who is due a refund of NRWT may make a request to the Commissioner under the tax transfer rules (see ¶2-148) to have the refund applied in payment of any amount of unpaid tax. Other parts of the Act, relating to the recovery of tax penalties, prosecutions, etc, apply with respect to NRWT as if it were income tax levied under s BB 1. NRWT is not part of a provisional tax calculation. Law: IT07 ss RA 2, RA 8, RA 10, RA 19, RA 23, RF 6, RM 8; TAA ss 100, 165B, 173T  ¶26-470 Non-resident financial arrangement income and related-party debt Non-resident passive income includes non-resident financial arrangement income (NRFAI). The rules for NRFAI focus on ensuring that an NRWT liability arises on interest on related-party debt at approximately the same time that an income tax deduction is available to the borrower for that interest. This is achieved by bringing the rules dealing with timing and quantification of income subject to NRWT in line with the financial arrangements rules. Under the previous rules a number of structures delayed or removed the liability for NRWT or replaced it with AIL. The rules apply to a cross-border loan between associates, extended to include lending through an associated non-resident owning body. The rules also encompass a back-to-back loan through a non-associated intermediary. Loans within the scope of the rules are described as related-party debt. The borrower under a related-party debt is required to calculate whether there has been a deferral in the payment of interest for the income year that gives rise to NRFAI. There is no deferral giving rise to NRFAI if the interest accrued for the income year is paid no later  than two months after balance date. There is also no NRFAI if the interest expense is less than $40,000. The following are the key concepts: ▪ non-resident financial arrangement income: the equivalent of the interest derived by the non-resident lender ▪ related-party debt: a financial arrangement between associated persons, or persons who are regarded as associated, providing funds to a borrower who is allowed a deduction for expenditure under the arrangement, and ▪ indirect associated funding: an arrangement involving some form of back-to-back lending. An offshore lender is said to derive NRFAI when all of the following apply: ▪ the lender is associated with or related to a borrower who is resident in New Zealand ▪ the funding is provided through related-party debt ▪ interest payments are deferred compared to interest deductions by the borrower, and ▪ the borrower’s expenditure on the related-party debt is more than a de minimis amount. The NRWT treatment is to align the NRFAI of the lender with the amount of the expenditure incurred by the borrower on the relatedparty debt. An adjustment is made for the first year in which the lender derives NRFAI. The lender is treated as having derived an additional amount that is sufficient to overcome the effect of a deferral of payment of the interest. The lender’s income is nonresident passive income from which NRWT must be accounted for. Related-party debt  Related-party debt is a financial arrangement under which the lender and the borrower are associated persons, there is indirect associated funding or funding is through an associated non-resident owning body. The financial arrangement must also confer an allowable deduction for the borrower. To ensure that the concept of related party of debt is sufficiently broad, the notion of money lent is extended in these circumstances to a financial arrangement that provides funds which result in the borrower incurring financial arrangement expenditure. With the focus on providing funds, a finance lease may fall within the concept but not, in general, a swap, futures or option instrument. A financial arrangement to which a member of a New Zealand banking group is a party will not be related-party debt, except where the funding is provided through an indirect associated funding arrangement. If there is related-party debt through lending by a nonresident owning body, the lender and the borrower are treated as associated for NRFAI purposes. Indirect associated funding arrangement The notion of an indirect associated funding arrangement refers essentially to an arrangement under which a non-resident, as the indirect lender, provides funds to a direct lender who provides funds to the borrower and: ▪ there is the purpose or effect that the borrower incurs financial arrangement expenditure and the indirect lender does not derive non-resident passive income from the borrower ▪ the indirect lender and the borrower are associated, and ▪ the funding is not otherwise related-party debt. For this purpose, association between a non-resident owning body and a borrower exists when the ownership interest of all members of the body in the borrower is 50% or more. Payments under the indirect associated funding arrangement are treated as having been made between the indirect lender and the  borrower, disregarding the direct lender. Payments between the indirect lender and the direct lender that exceed payments between the direct lender and the borrower are disregarded. Should the borrower fail to withhold NRWT, the indirect lender becomes liable to do so. The indirect lender’s liability is subject to the qualification that withholding is not required where the borrower advises that there is no indirect associated funding arrangement. Any excusing of the indirect lender to withhold NRWT does not affect the liability of the borrower to withhold. Non-resident financial arrangement income Non-resident financial arrangement income is defined in s RF 2C. In order for the section to apply, all of the following must first be satisfied: ▪ the borrower is resident in New Zealand or is a non-resident operating through a fixed establishment in New Zealand ▪ the lender is a non-resident who does not provide the loan funds through a New Zealand fixed establishment, and ▪ the arrangement produces non-resident passive income. Section RF 2C then provides that “non-resident financial arrangement income” for a financial arrangement and an income year means an amount having a source in New Zealand that is accrued on a related-party debt and derived by a lender in the income year when: ▪ NRFAI was derived from the loan by the lender in an earlier income year, or ▪ the borrower’s total expenditure for the income year on the related-party debt is more than the de minimis amount and the deferral calculation in relation to the financial arrangement is less than 90%. An election is available to disregard the de minimis threshold and the deferral calculation (see below).  De minimis expenditure The de minimis threshold is $40,000 or less. The threshold is determined by aggregating the previous year’s total expenditure on all related-party debt incurred by the borrower and other companies in the same group of companies. Note that the calculation is made in the currency of the financial arrangement, thus incorporating any foreign exchange movements and meaning a separate calculation excluding exchange fluctuations is not required. Deferral calculation Taxpayers are required to complete a deferral calculation for each related-party debt at the end of the second and subsequent years following issue of a financial arrangement to determine whether NRFAI arises. Where the deferral calculation is satisfied, NRFAI does not arise and the related-party debt continues to be taxed under the existing NRWT rules. The deferral calculation to be undertaken is: accumulated payments ÷ (accumulated accruals – hybrid deductions) where: accumulated payments is the total interest paid by the borrower since the financial arrangement became a related-party debt until the NRFAI due date for the borrower’s income year (being the 20th of the third month after balance date) accumulated accruals is the total expenditure the borrower incurs under the related-party debt over the same period, and hybrid deductions is the period’s denied deduction under the hybrid mismatch rules. The item for hybrid deductions ensures that expenditure subject to the hybrid mismatch rules (¶26-650) is not taken into account in determining whether a loan gives rise to NRFAI. The denial of a  deduction under the hybrid mismatch rules achieves the objective of overcoming any timing difference between the deduction of an interest expense and the payment of NRWT. With identification of the NRFAI due date, the NRFAI is deemed to have been paid on the last day of the preceding month, that is, at the end of the second month following balance date. The due date is appropriately brought forward should the related-party debt be repaid during the income year. The deferral calculation is made in the currency of denomination of the related-party debt. The calculation is treated as producing a deferral of more than 90% if the accumulated accruals item is zero or if the NRFAI due date is before related-party debt status applies. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to ensure the NRFAI deferral calculation formula cannot produce an undefined outcome as a consequence of the insertion of the hybrid deductions item in the formula by providing that the calculation will be treated as producing a deferral of more than 90% if the accumulated accruals item is equal to the hybrid deductions item. The amendment is intended to retrospectively apply from 1 July 2018. The deferral calculation helps identify the scenario where there is a significant deferral between the payment of interest and the accompanying NRWT liability compared with the borrower’s deduction for the interest expense. Although interest may be accrued on a daily basis the parties’ loan agreement may provide that it is paid in arrears. However, if the interest for an income year is accrued to balance date but paid shortly afterwards, there would be no objectionable deferral of the payment of interest. To assist with identifying a significant deferral the item for accumulated payments incorporates interest paid two months after balance date. That allows for interest accrued during the year but paid shortly after balance date.  The item for accumulated accruals and its exclusion for the most recent income year recognises that accruals calculated pursuant to the financial arrangements rules may often not be determined until shortly before the income tax return is filed. Using accumulated accruals but excluding the current year accrual means that the majority of the necessary calculations will have already been completed in the ordinary course of business.  Adopting a 90% rather than a 100% threshold also assists with identifying a related-party debt arrangement that does not confer a significant deferral. Note that once NRFAI arises in a year, NRWT continues to apply on an accrual basis so long as the financial arrangement is related-party debt. This means it will not be necessary for a taxpayer to repeat the above deferral calculation once the 90% threshold has been breached. Election to disregard de minimis threshold or deferral calculation Under s RF 12G, the borrower can choose to disregard the de minimis calculation or the deferral calculation in the first income year in which the borrower is party to the financial arrangement. This may be worthwhile if it is anticipated that the de minimis threshold may be exceeded in future income years and it is therefore administratively convenient to undertake early recognition of NRFAI. Similarly, a deferral calculation that results in a deferral of more than 90% may be disregarded, provided the related-party debt is for a term greater than 12 months and it is reasonably expected that NRFAI will arise for a later income year. To make an election the taxpayer must notify the Commissioner by the earlier of the first day on which interest is paid or the last day of the income year in which the arrangement becomes a related-party debt. Calculating non-resident financial arrangement income The general rule is that the amount of NRFAI derived by a lender for all or part of an income year is an amount equal to the expenditure the borrower incurs in the income year on the related-party debt. The expenditure of the borrower is that expenditure determined by the spreading method applied under the financial arrangements rules in subpart EW. Note that the fair value method and the market value method are excluded; if the borrower has used either of these methods another spreading method must be applied.  The borrower’s expenditure may include an expense of the borrower under the related-party debt that is not received by the lender. The calculation of income and expenditure is to be made in the currency of denomination of the loan. The income of the lender does not include foreign currency gains imputed as income of the borrower. There is an adjustment for the first income year in which the lender derives NRFAI. The adjustment is to add an amount the lender would have derived if the loan had always given rise to NRFAI. The adjustment is calculated under the formula: total accrual income − total interest where: total accrual income is total expenditure incurred by the borrower from the date the borrower became a party to the loan to the last day of the prior income year, and total interest is total interest paid by the borrower to all nonresidents from the date the borrower became a party to the loan to the NRFAI due date for the borrower’s income year. The calculation identifies the NRFAI for the first year in which the loan becomes related-party debt. By treating the non-resident lender as having derived an additional amount of income, any income deferral is removed from the related-party debt for all prior income years. Payment of non-resident financial arrangement income Non-resident financial arrangement income is treated as paid on the last day of the second month following the end of the borrower’s income year. In accordance with the general NRWT rules (see ¶26455), the NRWT return will then be due on the 20th of the third month after balance date. The payment date is brought forward should the related-party debt be repaid or cease to have that status. The NRFAI for the income  year is treated as having been paid on the last day of the second month following the relevant terminating event. Note that a prepayment of interest before 30 March 2017 on an existing cross-border loan may have become NRFAI if the loan became classified as related-party debt (s RZ 13). Application The provisions on NRFAI generally apply to the first income year of the borrower that starts after 30 March 2017. That is even if the loan had been made before that date. The effect of the commencement provisions is that the rules on NRFAI started with: ▪ the 2017–18 income year for the taxpayer with a balance date between 30 March 2017 and 30 September 2017, and ▪ the 2018–19 income year for the taxpayer with a balance date between 1 October 2017 and 29 March 2018. For further discussion on the non-resident financial arrangement income rules, including examples of how the provisions operate, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 5, June 2017 at 52–70. Law: IT07 ss RF 2, RF 2B, RF 2C, RF 12D–RF 12J, RZ 13, YA 1  Other non-resident income ¶26-480 Non-resident contractors A schedular payment, as a class of PAYE income payment, may create a 15% withholding obligation in relation to payments made to a non-resident contractor. If applicable, the withholding is an interim tax so that the non-resident contractor should file an annual tax return, showing the year’s schedular payments and associated expenses, and claim a credit for the 15% withholding (with top-up tax to pay or a refund to be received, as appropriate). A double tax agreement (DTA) may operate to effectively create an exemption if there is no permanent establishment in New Zealand.  Note that changes to the taxation of schedular payments mean that a non-resident contractor may now also elect their own rate of withholding, subject to a 15% minimum rate. See ¶3-044 for a full discussion of the taxation of schedular payments. A non-resident contractor is a non-resident who: ▪ performs services of any kind in New Zealand (except as an employee), or ▪ supplies the use of, or right to use, in New Zealand any personal property or services. Withholding from a schedular payment applies to the extent that the payment is a contract payment. Excluded from the notion of a contract payment is: ▪ a royalty ▪ a reimbursement of costs of the non-resident contractor (unless the parties are associated), and ▪ payments for labour-only building work or as crew of a fishing boat. If a non-resident contractor has not elected a rate or received a special tax rate certificate, the standard rate of withholding from a schedular payment to a non-resident contractor is 15%. It is important to note, however, that the Commissioner’s view is that the standard non-resident contractor rate is to be applied only when the schedular payment does not fall within a more specific category of schedular payment (for example, the 25% rate applying to payment for media contributions carried out by freelance contributors). It may be necessary to calculate a grossed-up amount of the schedular payment. This is where the payer of the schedular payment pays a gross (tax-inclusive) amount whilst being responsible for the tax on the payment. In that event, the amount paid to the non-resident contractor is regarded as the net (after-tax) amount. The gross-up calculation is the same as for NRWT  purposes (division of the net amount by 0.85: for an example, see ¶26-450). The payer of the schedular payment may apply to the Commissioner to be released from the obligation to withhold the amount by providing a bond or other security to the Commissioner for the amount that would otherwise be required to be withheld. This is where it cannot reasonably be determined at the time of payment whether the payment will be exempt income of the non-resident contractor. Exclusions from schedular payment No schedular payment is paid to the non-resident contractor, and therefore no withholding obligation arises, where one of the following applies: ▪ the payment is an exempt payment under s 24H and sch 5, pt C, cl 6 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 ▪ the payment is for services provided by the non-resident contractor who has full relief from tax under a DTA and who is present in New Zealand for no more than 92 days in a 12-month period, or ▪ the total amount paid to the non-resident contractor is no more than $15,000 in a 12-month period. Inland Revenue has released an interpretation statement, IS 10/04, “Non-resident contractor schedular payments”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 29–42, which addresses some interpretative issues and other practical matters related to nonresident contractor’s tax on schedular payments. A number of examples are included. Where the non-resident contractor conducts more than one activity in New Zealand, each one is considered separately for the purposes of the second of these exclusions. The fact that one or more activities or investments do not have full relief under an applicable DTA does not affect whether payments for another activity are  excluded from being a schedular payment. For example, the fact that interest or dividends do not have full relief does not affect whether contract payments for, say, providing services in New Zealand, are schedular payments: Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 7, August 2010 at 33. Impact of COVID-19 virus on 92-day period Inland Revenue has stated that if a person is prevented from leaving New Zealand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the additional days spent in New Zealand will not count towards the 92-day threshold discussed above. This will apply provided the person leaves New Zealand within a reasonable time after they are no longer practically restricted from travelling, Example Jim is a contractor based overseas who visited New Zealand to provide some specialist engineering advice on a construction project. Jim’s stay was intended to be for 70 days, but he has become stranded in New Zealand. For the purpose of the 92day test he will remain fixed at the day count as it was from when he was unable to leave New Zealand, and up to, and including, the day when he departs. So long as Jim leaves New Zealand within a reasonable time from when he is no longer practically restricted from travelling, he will not be held to have received a schedular payment. Jim has not become subject to the withholding tax obligations in the PAYE rules because he stayed longer than 92 days in these circumstances. Jim plans to leave as soon as he is able. Example from Inland Revenue, “COVID-19 - Your questions answered”, 23 April 2020  Exemption An exemption from withholding may be granted by the Commissioner in any one of the following circumstances: ▪ the non-resident contractor does not derive income because of a DTA or for some other reason ▪ the non-resident contractor provides a bond or other security for the payment of any income tax payable, or  ▪ in the preceding 24 months the non-resident contractor has paid all income tax owing, complied with the contractor’s New Zealand tax obligations and the Commissioner is satisfied that the compliance will continue. Special tax rate certificate The Commissioner has a discretion to issue a special tax rate certificate to a non-resident contractor specifying the amount of tax on the schedular payment or the rate of tax applying to schedular payments. The special tax rate certificate may be based on any relevant factors such as the expected revenue and expenditure resulting from the contract and the non-resident contractor’s other sources of income or losses. The non-resident contractor who is to receive a schedular payment for the use of or the right to use personal property may, for example, request a special tax rate certificate to align with the tax rate provided for in the royalties article of an applicable DTA. Shortfall penalties Where payers neglect to withhold tax from payments made to nonresident contractors, a penalty of $250 will be imposed for each month for which the payer failed to withhold tax. The penalty is capped at $1,000 per requirement to provide employment income information. This penalty will apply instead of a penalty to take reasonable care if a DTA relieves a non-resident contractor from all liability to pay tax on the payment. For remission provisions, see ¶14-180. Law: IT07 ss RD 8, RD 23, RD 24, YA 1, sch 4, pt A; TAA ss 24H, 141AA, sch 5, pt C, cl 6  ¶26-485 Non-resident sportspeople and entertainers Subject to the exemption in s CW 20, tax at the rate of 20% should be withheld under the pay as you earn (PAYE) rules from payments made to non-resident sportspeople or entertainers for performances given during a visit to New Zealand. This tax is a final tax unless the  person elects to put in a return (in order to claim expenses) or there is other income from New Zealand to be taken into account. If no amount is withheld from the payment when it is made to the entertainer, the entertainer must pay the tax to Inland Revenue (IR) by the 20th day of the month following that in which the payment was made, or by the date of their departure from New Zealand if that is earlier. Note that, unlike a non-resident contractor, a non-resident entertainer cannot elect their own rate of withholding tax or obtain a special tax rate certificate and they also cannot apply for an exemption (see ¶3-044). In the case of a US entertainer, the double tax agreement with the United States provides that gross receipts not exceeding US$10,000 are exempt from tax. The definition of “non-resident entertainer” is set out in s YA 1 for the purposes of the PAYE rules. Exemption for cultural programmes Pursuant to s CW 20, there is an exemption from New Zealand tax for any income of a non-resident sportsperson or entertainer derived from an activity or performance during a visit: ▪ that occurs under a cultural programme of, or wholly or partly sponsored by, the New Zealand Government or any overseas Government ▪ is conducted under the auspices of a not-for-profit overseas foundation, trust or other organisation that promotes cultural activities for the public, or ▪ in relation to any sport in which the participant is the official representative of a body that administers the sport in the overseas country. Section CW 20 has its own definition of the term “non-resident entertainer”. The exemption extends to the employer of a nonresident entertainer, or the entertainer’s own company or business.  The Commissioner has recently discussed the circumstances in which the exemption in s CW 20 will apply in Interpretation Statement IS 19/03, “Income tax — Exempt income of non-resident entertainers” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 7, August 2019 at 39). IS 19/03 discusses each of the circumstances in which income derived by a non-resident entertainer, other than a sportsperson, will be exempt, and then discusses when income derived by a nonresident entertainer from sporting activities will be exempt, considering the need for the sportsperson to be an official representative of an administering body. It also discusses what happens if the income is derived by the non-resident entertainer’s employer, or a company or firm with which the entertainer has some connection, rather than by the entertainer themselves. Cultural programme A cultural programme will belong to the government (New Zealand or overseas) if that programme is funded by the government. For completeness, as this is a departure from the view taken by the Commissioner in the earlier 1992 item, in IS 19/03 the Commissioner notes that neither the wording nor the policy of the legislation requires: • the non-resident entertainer to be an employee of the government or a government agency, or • the funding to be by way of monetary remuneration to an employee. The Commissioner’s view is also that sponsorship of a cultural programme requires the government (New Zealand or overseas) to pay or contribute to the costs of that programme. That is, the cultural programme must be wholly or partly funded by the government. The Commissioner’s view is that a programme that has received government funding to any extent will be the kind of programme that was anticipated to qualify under the exemption. Not-for-profit overseas organisations  In relation to visits organised by an overseas non-profit foundation, trust or organisation formed to promote cultural activities, the visits could include national, state and civic organisations such as orchestras, choirs and similar public-funded cultural activities. The Commissioner’s view is that, in practice, the inclusion of “other organisation” indicates that the provision potentially applies to any overseas group of people that meets the stipulated requirements. Note that a performance under a programme of a New Zealand organisation will not meet the requirements, even if the entertainer is a non-resident. Sportspeople In relation to sportspersons, the athletes have to be the official representatives of an administering body of the sport in their home country. A person who merely affiliates with, or is a member of, an administering body will not qualify for the exemption. Similarly, a person will not qualify if they affiliate with a sporting body but compete on an individual basis rather than as an “official representative” of that body. The exemption only applies to sportspersons who officially represent their overseas country. The effect of this requirement is that the exemption is available for a visiting national team but not a club or provincial side. Supporting personnel IS 19/03 also discusses the position of supporting personnel for touring performers and sportspersons and whether they have a sufficient connection with the relevant event. The Commissioner’s view is that supporting personnel are not included as non-resident entertainers or sportspersons. However, supporting personnel may still qualify for an exemption under s CW 19 (see ¶26-420). Service provider There is an extension of the exemption to entertainers and sportspersons who perform their activities through a service provider. If the income would have been exempt if derived by the non-resident entertainer, the exemption continues to be available to a service provider that:  ▪ provides the services of the non-resident entertainer during the visit to New Zealand, and ▪ is one of the following: □ the entertainer’s employer □ a company of which the entertainer is an officer, or □ a firm of which the entertainer is a principal. There is no restriction on the residency of the service provider. IS 19/03 also includes a number of examples to assist in explaining the application of the law. Law: IT07 ss CW 20, RD 19, YA 1, sch 4, pt F  ¶26-495 Non-resident software suppliers To provide guidance on the income tax treatment of payments for computer software Inland Revenue published the interpretation guideline, “Non-resident software suppliers’ payments derived from New Zealand — income tax treatment”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 15, No 11, November 2003 at 8. The guideline takes the approach that computer software transactions can generally be classified into two types: ▪ those relating to the copyright rights in the computer program, and ▪ those relating to copies of the program protected by copyright. From a tax perspective, it is important to determine which category the transaction falls into, because consideration received from a transaction involving the use of, or the right to use, a copyright is a royalty; whereas consideration received from a transaction involving the use of, or the right to use, a computer program is not. When considering this issue, the method of delivery, the form of consideration or the labels used are not relevant. Regard must be  had to the terms of the particular agreement between the parties and all the circumstances of the case from a practical and business perspective. The guideline considers the following types of computer software transactions: ▪ sale of a copyright right in a computer program (generally not subject to non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) but possibly taxable as business income) ▪ licence of a copyright right in a computer program (generally subject to a final NRWT) ▪ sale of a copy of a computer program or copyrighted article, including software with an end-user licence or “shrink-wrap” software (generally not subject to NRWT but possibly taxable as business income) ▪ lease of a copy of a computer program (generally subject to schedular withholding tax under the pay as you earn (PAYE) rules, or NRWT on a royalty, or as a finance lease with the interest component subject to NRWT or approved-issuer levy) ▪ supply of services for the development or modification of a computer program not connected with a licence of copyright rights or knowhow (generally taxed as business income and subject to schedular withholding tax under the PAYE rules) ▪ supply of knowhow relating to a computer program (generally subject to a minimum NRWT). The application of a double tax agreement in any of the above transactions is also considered. The guideline also contains discussion on several other matters, such as the special characteristics of computer programs, use of market intermediaries and the provision of ancillary services. A number of examples are also provided.  Foreign investor tax credits (FITC) ¶26-500 Foreign investor tax credit (FITC) and supplementary dividends The foreign investor tax credit (FITC) regime is potentially applicable only in relation to dividends paid to a non-resident shareholder who holds a less than 10% voting interest in the distributing company or where the rate of non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) applicable to the dividend is 15% or more. If applicable, the objective of the FITC regime is to recoup from the non-resident shareholder the NRWT on a dividend to the shareholder to the extent that the dividend is fully imputed. This is achieved by the payment of an additional “supplementary dividend” to foreign investors equal to the NRWT imposed on the dividend. A tax credit, based on the dividend imputation credit and equal to the supplementary dividend, is allowed to a New Zealand resident company that pays an imputed dividend and a supplementary dividend to the same foreign investor. While NRWT remains payable, its cost to the non-resident is effectively removed by the payment of the supplementary dividend. FITC is available where, in an income year, a New Zealand resident company (with respect to its own shares) pays a dividend and a related supplementary dividend to a non-resident shareholder where: ▪ the non-resident shareholder has less than a 10% direct voting interest in the company, and ▪ the post-treaty tax rate for the initial dividend and its related supplementary dividend is 15% or more. A “supplementary dividend” is a dividend paid in respect of an earlier dividend in the same income year and is equal in amount to the tax credit calculated with respect to that earlier dividend. Only one supplementary dividend can be paid with each dividend. Imputation credits are not attached to the supplementary dividend.  Calculation of FITC The amount of the FITC credit is calculated by multiplying the amount of the imputation credit that would otherwise be attached to the shareholder’s dividend by 54/119 (equivalent to 0.4537815 of the imputation amount). The FITC regime at the time of its introduction is explained by the Commissioner in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 11, March 1996 at 24. At that time the FITC regime was based on a company tax rate of 33%. Amendments to the regime in 2010 to take account of the change in the company tax rate are explained in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 11, February 2010 at 26–27. Law: IT07 subpart LP, s YA 1  OTHER INTERNATIONAL TAX REGIMES Transfer pricing ¶26-600 Introduction to transfer pricing Transfer pricing refers to the practice of shifting profits from one jurisdiction to another through the manipulation of prices paid for goods, services and intangibles, generally between associated parties. The effect of this price manipulation is that a multinational group can shift profits to the country that imposes the lowest tax cost. The types of goods and services which are commonly traded cross border by multinational groups are as follows: ▪ Services: □ management services □ loans □ guarantees  □ technical services, and □ commissions. ▪ Goods: □ equipment □ raw materials □ finished goods, and □ work in progress. ▪ Intangibles: □ licences □ use of trade marks or brand names, and □ information and technology. The rules are based on the approach adopted by other jurisdictions and on the OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administration. For an in-depth discussion of New Zealand’s transfer pricing regime, see CCH, Transfer Pricing Handbook: A Practical Guide for New Zealand Business.  ¶26-605 Inland Revenue transfer pricing guidelines Overall, the income tax legislation provides little practical guidance on transfer pricing methodologies and how they should be applied. The Commissioner has stated that Inland Revenue (IR) will apply the latest OECD guidelines. These guidelines are consistent with New Zealand’s transfer-pricing legislation and double taxation treaties. Amendments made in 2018 to strengthen the transfer pricing rules so they align with the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines and Australia’s transfer pricing rules are discussed in ¶26-608 below.  Transactions affected by the regime Arrangements affected by the transfer pricing rules are those that: ▪ involve the supply and acquisition of goods, services or anything else ▪ where the supplier and acquirer are associated persons, and ▪ the arrangement is a cross-border arrangement (as distinguished from an arrangement that is wholly within the New Zealand tax base). An arrangement includes any contract, agreement, plan or understanding (whether enforceable or not) including all steps and transactions by which it is carried into effect. Cross-border transactions The transfer pricing regime applies to cross-border transactions, being an arrangement between: ▪ two non-residents (unless each enters into the arrangement for the purposes of a business carried on by that person in New Zealand through a fixed establishment) ▪ a resident and a non-resident (unless the non-resident enters into the arrangement for the purposes of a business carried on by that person in New Zealand through a fixed establishment and the New Zealand resident has not entered into the arrangement for the purposes of an offshore business carried on by that New Zealand resident), or ▪ two residents, if either or both enter into the arrangement for the purposes of an offshore business. Ambit of transfer pricing rules The transfer pricing rules require the substitution of an arm’s length amount where the taxpayer is either paying an excessive consideration for the acquisition or receiving an inadequate  consideration for the supply. The arm’s length amount is the price set according to the arm’s length principle. That is, the price that would be agreed if the parties to a related party transaction were unrelated parties and acted at arm’s length. Excessive consideration payable for acquisition If the amount of consideration payable by a taxpayer for an acquisition exceeds the arm’s length amount, the consideration deemed to be payable is adjusted downwards to reflect the arm’s length amount. This means that the taxpayer’s income tax liability must be adjusted. Generally, no corresponding adjustment is necessary to any withholding tax or deduction. Inadequate consideration received for supply If the amount of consideration receivable by a taxpayer for such an arrangement falls below the arm’s length amount, an upwards adjustment is made to the consideration receivable. The arm’s length amount is treated as the amount receivable for all purposes of the Income Tax Act relating to: ▪ the taxpayer’s income tax liability for any income year, or ▪ the obligation of persons other than the taxpayer to make a tax withholding or deduction from the amount. For non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) purposes the actual consideration exchanged by the parties is the basis for the deduction of NRWT. No upwards adjustment will be made if the taxpayer is neither resident in New Zealand nor entering into the arrangement for the purposes of carrying on business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment in New Zealand, and the amount is: ▪ interest, royalties or an insurance premium allowed as a deduction to the other party, or ▪ a dividend receivable on a fixed-rate share. Determination of arm’s length amount  The OECD guidelines provide guidance on applying the “arm’s length principle”, which is the international consensus on the valuation for tax purposes of cross-border transactions between associated parties. In a global economy where multinational enterprises (MNEs) play an increasingly prominent role, consistent application of the arm’s length principle helps to ensure: ▪ taxable profits reported by MNEs in the countries where they operate reflect the economic activity undertaken there, and ▪ taxpayers avoid the risk of double taxation as a result of a dispute between two countries when determining the arm’s length remuneration for their cross-border transactions. The OECD guidelines also contain detailed guidance for performing comparability analyses in practice to compare the conditions of transactions between associated enterprises with those of independent enterprises. Taxpayers are required to use at least one of the five methods prescribed in the New Zealand legislation to determine arm’s length prices. There are three transactional and two profit-based methods. The transactional methods are: ▪ the comparable uncontrolled price method (the price that would be charged in a similar transaction undertaken between unrelated parties) ▪ the resale price method (the estimation of an arm’s length amount by subtracting the appropriate costs and profit margin from the resale price charged by the buyer in an arm’s length dealing), and ▪ the cost plus method (the estimation of an arm’s length consideration by adding an appropriate profit mark-up to the supplier’s cost — a mark-up determined by reference to the mark-up earned by the same supplier in comparable dealing with an independent party, or the mark-up earned by a similar supplier involved in a comparable arm’s length transaction).  The profit-based methods are: ▪ the transactional profit split method (a method for determining the profit that would be earned by related parties if they were operating at arm’s length — this involves an allocation of the parties’ combined profits based on a functional analysis of the economic value each has contributed), and ▪ the transactional net margin method. The choice and application of the appropriate method must be made having regard to: ▪ the degree of comparability between the uncontrolled transactions used for comparison and the controlled transactions of the taxpayer ▪ the completeness and accuracy of the data relied on by the taxpayer, and ▪ the reliability of all assumptions and the sensitivity of any results to possible deficiencies in the data and assumptions. The OECD guidelines also give guidance on how to select the most appropriate transfer pricing method for the circumstances of the case and how to apply, in practice, two of the OECD approved transfer pricing methods (the transactional profit methods) — the transactional net margin method and the transactional profit split method. The OECD guidelines also contain a chapter providing detailed guidance on the transfer pricing aspects of business restructurings. The taxpayer’s choice of arm’s length amount will be upheld unless the Commissioner can demonstrate a more reliable amount or the taxpayer has not co-operated with the Commissioner’s administration of the transfer pricing regime so as to materially affect that administration. In other words, the Commissioner has the burden of proving that the choice of method was inappropriate. Transfer pricing documentation  There is no legislative requirement for a taxpayer to document its transfer pricing policy. However, if taxpayers affected by the regime prepare documentation, this could serve as evidence of compliance with the arm’s length principle. Advance pricing agreements An advance pricing agreement (APA) is a forward agreement between a business and one or more tax authorities regarding that business’s transfer pricing practices. An APA can be issued as a private binding ruling under s 91E of the Tax Administration Act 1994 or under the mutual agreement articles in New Zealand’s double tax agreements. Compensating adjustment If a taxpayer conducts two related non-arm’s length transactions and only one of them is adjusted, a compensating adjustment may be allowed to provide relief in relation to the other one. Broadly, eligibility requires that the same parties and the same subject matter are involved in each transaction, and that the adjustment takes place in the same income year or in the year immediately before or after that income year. A likely scenario for a compensation payment is where parties adopt a fixed price to record transactions but the market price in fact fluctuates during the period. An arm’s length amount is allowed to be substituted for the actual consideration payable or receivable under the compensation adjustment arrangement. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 7, No 11, March 1996 at 8. Anti-avoidance rules Even though the transfer pricing rules are aimed at cross-border transactions, certain domestic transactions will also be affected by the regime if they are part of a broader transfer pricing arrangement. An anti-avoidance rule extends the transfer pricing rule to collateral arrangements that have the purpose or effect of defeating the transfer pricing provisions, such as a market sharing arrangement, an arrangement not to enter into a particular market, a back-to-back supply arrangement or an income-sharing arrangement.  Apportionment of income and expenditure of branches In certain circumstances, an apportionment is required between the income and expenditure from a business or contract conducted across international borders. Situations not covered by the general transfer pricing rules are covered by s YD 5. Broadly, s YD 5 applies when there is only a single entity. Administrative practice for services In view of the extent of trans-Tasman trade and investment between associated parties, IR has set the de minimis threshold for services at NZ$1m to align with the Australian Tax Office’s approach and to further minimise compliance costs for MNEs. Administrative practice for small value loans IR’s advice for small value loans from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 is that 375 basis points (3.75%) over the relevant base indicator (generally the bank bill rate for variable rate loans or the swap rate for fixed rate loans) is broadly indicative of an arm’s length rate, in the absence of a readily available market rate for a debt instrument with similar terms and risk characteristics. The small value loan threshold is set at NZ$10m. The next review is scheduled for 30 June 2021. Law: IT07 ss GB 2, GC 6–GC 14, YD 5  ¶26-608 Changes to transfer pricing rules — base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) measures New Zealand’s transfer pricing legislation was previously based on analysing the legal form of the transaction and adjusting the consideration that was paid to match an arm’s length amount. In contrast, Australia’s transfer pricing rules and the OECD’s 2017 transfer pricing guidelines are based on a broader, economic substance approach. This includes requiring the conditions of the transaction to align with the economic substance and actual conduct of the parties.  With effect for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018, New Zealand’s transfer pricing legislation has been strengthened so it aligns with the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines and Australia’s transfer pricing rules. Guidance materials Inland Revenue released guidance material, “BEPS — Transfer pricing rules”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 12. The materials discuss the amendments made in more detail. Country-by-country reports The requirement for large multinationals to file a country-by-country report has also been codified. Inland Revenue already required New Zealand headquartered multinational groups with annual consolidated group revenue of font=Arial charset=unicode code=8364 descr='[euro]'750m or more in the previous financial year to file a country-by-country report using the IR 1032 (May 2018) prescribed form for all income years beginning on or after 1 January 2016. With effect from 27 June 2018, the legislation codifies this requirement. See further at Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 10. Law: ITA ss GC 6–GC 14; TAA s 78G  ¶26-610 Restricted transfer pricing approach to relatedparty debt — base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) measures To address profit-shifting, a restricted transfer pricing approach has been introduced that limits the interest rate on related-party debt. It does this by setting specific rules and parameters to: ▪ establish the credit rating of the New Zealand borrower, and ▪ determine (in combination with the credit rating rule) the amount of interest on the debt.  Ownership is calculated using the same approach taken in determining whether the thin capitalisation rule applies. This means ownership is calculated taking into account non-voting shares and rights to receive distributions of income or capital, as well as voting interests. In addition, in determining a person’s voting interests, it will be the highest of the shareholder decision-making rights that will be relevant, not the average. The rules generally require that a group credit rating will apply to the New Zealand borrower — being the credit rating of the group’s member with the highest level of unsecured third party debt minus 2 notches (1 notch if the credit rating is below BBB−) unless the borrower’s own credit rating is equal or higher than its foreign parent’s credit rating — in cases where there is a high BEPS risk. A high BEPS risk is when the New Zealand borrower has: ▪ a high leverage ratio — being more than 40% debt unless their debt percentage is within 110% of the leverage ratio of their worldwide group ▪ borrowed from a low tax rate jurisdiction (lower than 15%) different from the ultimate parent. A de minimis rule is included, so that a borrower with less than $10m of related-party cross-border loans will not have to consider the credit rating adjustment part of the rules and will apply the borrower’s credit rating as they do now. Taxpayers are also able to choose to use the group credit rating as a safe harbour to reduce compliance costs. In other cases where the presumed credit rating does not apply, the rules allow the borrower’s standalone rating to be used, taking into account any implicit parental support. Under this approach there is still a strong presumption that the New Zealand borrower would be supported by its foreign parent when it is part of a multinational group and is therefore a less risky borrower compared to an unrelated New Zealand entity.  Where a New Zealand borrower has a high BEPS risk but no identifiable parent, they will generally be required to use a restricted credit rating — being the borrower’s own credit rating if they had no higher than 40% debt and the credit rating cannot be lower than BBB−. A borrower that has a credit rating implied from third party debt will generally be able to apply that credit rating on related-party debt where they choose to do so, even when the borrower is a high BEPS risk. Aside from making the borrower appear riskier with excessive debt funding, the other way interest rates can be inflated is by imposing conditions on the lending that would not normally be found in standard third-party debt. Therefore, rules are included that generally require the following terms and conditions to be disregarded when pricing related-party loans: ▪ loan terms of more than five years ▪ subordination, and ▪ other exotic features (such as interest payment deferral and convertibility to equity at the option of the borrower) that are generally not seen with third-party lending. However, in some cases the New Zealand borrower may have borrowed from related parties using the same terms and conditions as their third-party debt. In such cases, they will be able to retain equivalent conditions when pricing their related-party loans, so long as the relevant third-party loans comprise at least 25% of their total related-party debt. This reflects the fact that when borrowing from a third party, there are commercial pressures to try to obtain a low interest rate, so the borrower is unlikely to agree to unnecessary conditions that increase the interest rate. ▸ Note: An amendment is proposed to the above third-party test for exotic features in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility  Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020. The third-party test allows exotic features in relatedparty borrowing if those features are present in significant third-party borrowing. This test effectively treats all debt other than borrowing from associated persons as third-party debt. However, related-party borrowing is wider than associated persons, including funding, such as from a non-resident owning body, or a back-to-back loan. The Bill proposes to amend the test so that related-party borrowing that is not from an associated person cannot be used to justify an exotic feature of related-party debt. The amendment is intended to apply from the original application date of the rules – 1 July 2018. Note that special rules will apply to determine a financial institution, defined as an “insuring or lending person”, such as banks, insurance companies and those in the business of lending to third parties. Guidance materials Inland Revenue released guidance material, “BEPS — Interest limitation rules”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 12. The materials discuss each of the provisions in more detail and include flowcharts and examples. Law: IT07 ss GC 15–GC 19  Thin capitalisation ¶26-620 Introduction to thin capitalisation Thin capitalisation is a regime that aims to limit the amount of interest deductions against the New Zealand tax base. Thin capitalisation applies to both inward investment by a non-resident and outbound investment by a New Zealand resident. The tenor of the regime is that if the debt level of a corporate group or other taxpayer exceeds prescribed levels s CH 9 treats the interest expense on the excess debt as an item of income. Thin capitalisation refers to the practice whereby a transaction is deliberately geared so as to artificially lower the income of an  enterprise in a particular jurisdiction. For example, a non-resident might choose to fund its New Zealand operations through debt rather than equity, resulting in large interest deductions being attributed to the New Zealand tax base. Consequently, the taxable income of the non-resident’s New Zealand operations is reduced. For example, in the absence of thin capitalisation rules, interest paid by a New Zealand subsidiary to its non-resident parent would be deductible to the New Zealand subsidiary so that income equal to the deduction would not be subject to New Zealand corporate tax of 28%. New Zealand taxation would be limited to non-resident withholding tax of 10% or 15%, depending on whether double tax agreement relief is available. The effect of the practices is that a multinational group can shift profits to a country that provides for a low rate of tax. Alternatively, there may be benefits if income is taxed in another country. For example, an Australian headquartered group may prefer that New Zealand-sourced profits are taxed in Australia to generate franking credits that Australian shareholders can utilise. The thin capitalisation regime applies to both outbound investment and inbound investment. Thin capitalisation in the context of outbound investment refers to the practice of excessive borrowing by New Zealand companies, whether owned by residents or nonresidents, to generate offshore active income that is exempt from taxation under the controlled foreign company (CFC) rules or the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules as an Australian FIF or a FIF accounted for under the attributable FIF income method. Inbound investment refers to the converse situation involving non-residents who invest into New Zealand. Thresholds There are different thresholds for each kind of investment with inbound investment assigned the lower threshold. For inbound investment no loss of interest deductibility occurs if the applicable New Zealand group debt percentage does not exceed 60% and the world group debt percentage does not exceed 110%. For outbound investment no loss of interest deductibility occurs if the New Zealand  group debt percentage does not exceed 75% or the worldwide group debt percentage does not exceed 110%. An additional relief for outbound investment stipulates that full interest deductibility remains where New Zealand group assets are more than 90% of the assets of the worldwide group. A further de minimis relief for outbound investment is to the effect that there is no apportionment where the finance costs do not exceed $1m with tapered relief if finance costs are between $1m and $2m. With effect for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018, the Taxation (Neutralising Base Erosion and Profit Shifting) Act 2018, discussed below, reduced the 110% threshold to 100% for a New Zealand group controlled by a group of non-residents acting together, and extended the de minimis relief to inbound investment as well. Instead of applying the thin capitalisation rules on the basis of a debt-to-asset ratio, a New Zealand-based group with offshore investments may choose an approach based on the ratio of interest expense to pre-tax cashflows. The objective is to possibly relax the rules for a business able to obtain significant third-party funding on the basis of internally developed goodwill, an asset generally unable to be recognised under generally accepted accounting principles. The alternative approach is justifiable because there may be no unreasonable structuring of debt levels in New Zealand. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 6, July 2012 at 35. A low-value tangible asset company that chooses the alternative approach has no reduction of interest deductions in accordance with the thin capitalisation rules where the ratio of net interest expense to net income for the New Zealand group is the lesser of 50% and 110% of the worldwide group’s net interest to adjusted net profit ratio. The adjusted net profit item is the net cashflow from group operations. Changes The Taxation (Neutralising Base Erosion and Profit Shifting) Act 2018 was enacted on 27 June 2018. The Act contained changes aimed at preventing multinationals using various base erosion and  profit shifting (BEPS) strategies to shift profits offshore (see further at ¶26-608, ¶26-610 and ¶26-650). The Act also contained a number of amendments to the thin capitalisation rules that apply for income years commencing on or after 1 July 2018. The changes: ▪ Modified how a company’s total assets are determined by requiring assets to be determined net of a company’s non-debt liabilities. For a borrower’s New Zealand group, non-debt liabilities are defined as all liabilities as shown in the company’s financial accounts that are not included in the calculation of total group debt, except for: □ certain interest-free loans from shareholders □ certain shares held by shareholders □ provisions for dividends, and □ certain deferred tax liabilities. A similar definition of non-debt liabilities also applies for a company’s worldwide group, being all liabilities that are not counted as group debt less any debt from a person with an ownership interest in the entity (owner-linked debt). ▪ Extended the de minimis relief to inbound thin capitalisation rules, unless they have owner-linked debt. ▪ Reduced the ability of companies owned by a group of nonresidents to use related-party debt by reducing the 110% worldwide debt threshold to 100% for a New Zealand group controlled by a group of non-residents acting together for the purposes of the interest apportionment rule. The changes require that when an entity is owned or controlled by a group of non-residents acting together, interest deductions are denied if the entity has any owner-linked debt and its total  debt level exceeds 60%. In effect, this means its allowable debt level is the greater of 60% and 100% of its third-party debt rather than 110% of its third-party debt under the previous rules. Transitional provisions are provided for entities affected by this change. An entity may continue to use their current percentage of third-party debt up to the 110% threshold for up to five years from the rules applying. The current percentage of third-party debt is calculated at either 6 December 2017 (the date of introduction of the Bill) or the thin capitalisation measurement date immediately before this. ▪ Introduced new rules for when a company can use an asset valuation for thin capitalisation purposes that is different from what is used for financial reporting purposes. Previously a company could use the net current value of an asset as an alternative to what is reported in their financial statements provided that was allowable under generally accepted accounting principles. Taxpayers are now only able to use the net current value of an asset if they have received a valuation from an independent valuer or the valuation methodology, assumptions and data have been approved by an independent valuer. ▪ Introduced an anti-avoidance rule that applies when a taxpayer substantially repays a loan before the end of a year to circumvent the thin capitalisation rules. The previous provision only applied to changes between measurement dates and did not cover the initial year when an arrangement was entered into. The Act made amendments to s FE 11 and introduced s GB 51B to reconstruct certain situations, transactions or arrangements where a taxpayer subject to the thin capitalisation rules substantially repays a loan or, more generally, enters into a transaction near a measurement date with the purpose or effect of manipulating the thin capitalisation rules.  ▪ Amended the owner-linked debt provisions to ensure they operate correctly for trusts. The owner-linked debt provisions applied if the owner had an ownership interest of 5% or more. This test did not cover trusts as settlements on a trust do not convey ownership interests. The amendments count debt as owner linked if the owner has made 5% or more, by value, of the settlements on the trust. ▪ Provided entities carrying out eligible infrastructure projects (contracts entered into with the central government or Crown entities) an exemption from the thin capitalisation rules by allowing them to claim deductions on debt that exceeds the ordinary thin capitalisation thresholds. The exemption only applies to debt that relates to “public project assets” and “public project debt”. The exemption applies to entities controlled by a single non-resident, partnerships entered into by non-residents, and New Zealand resident entities subject to the outbound thin capitalisation rules. A similar exemption already applies (in effect) where a separate entity is controlled by a group of non-residents. In addition, amendments ensured that interest for which deductions are permanently denied under the hybrid rules (see ¶26-650) do not give rise to additional income under the thin capitalisation rules and that the debt associated with such interest is not treated as debt under those rules. Note also that further interest limitation rules have been introduced by the Act in the form of a restricted transfer pricing rule — see ¶26610. Law: IT07 subpart FE, ss CH 9, CH 10B, GB 51B, FZ 8  ¶26-625 Ambit of thin capitalisation rules The function of subpart FE is to apportion interest expenditure between New Zealand-sourced income and other income for a New  Zealand taxpayer who has a disproportionately high level of debt funding in relation to their worldwide interest expenditure and who: ▪ is under the control of a single non-resident ▪ is a person (an outbound entity) with an income interest in a CFC or an interest in a FIF for which the attributable FIF income method is used, or which satisfies the exemption for nonportfolio interests in Australian resident FIFs, or ▪ is a New Zealand resident who controls an outbound entity. The subpart also prescribes an acceptable level of equity for a foreign-owned bank for the application of the interest apportionment rules. The rules have also been extended to apply to a New Zealand taxpayer controlled by a non-resident owning body or controlled by a group of entities (including non-residents and entities controlled by non-residents) that act together. In short, a non-resident owning body is a group of non-residents or entities described in s FE 2(1) (cc) to (db) (see below) that have one or more characteristics indicating they are acting together to debt-fund a New Zealand company. These characteristics are having: ▪ proportionate levels of debt and equity among the group ▪ an agreement that sets out how the company should be funded with member-linked funding if the company is not widely held ▪ member-linked debt in the company in a way recommended to, or implemented for, the members as a group by a person (such as a private equity manager). For further discussion on non-resident owning bodies, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 50–54. Who the regime applies to Section FE 2(1) specifies the categories of persons who are potentially subject to the interest apportionment requirement or, in  the case of a reporting bank, likely to suffer an annual total deduction adjustment. The thin capitalisation rules may also extend to all types of trusts for tax purposes (not just non-complying trusts). A trust will be subject to the rules if 50% or more of the settlements are made by a non-resident or person associated with the non-resident, an entity subject to the inbound thin capitalisation rules, or a group of non-residents or entities subject to the thin capitalisation rules that act in concert. A trust will also be subject to the rules if a person subject to the rules has the power to appoint or remove a trustee. Section FE 2(1) provides that the regime applies to persons who fall into the following categories: ▪ non-residents who are not companies (para (a)) ▪ non-resident company (including a unit trust), unless a New Zealand resident holds a 50% or greater direct ownership interest and no non-resident has a greater than 50% direct ownership interest when added together with the interests of associates of the non-resident (para (b)) ▪ New Zealand resident company in which a non-resident has a 50% or greater ownership interest or control of the company by any other means (para (c)) ▪ New Zealand resident company with members who make up a non-resident owning body for the company holding ownership interests of 50% or more (determined as if the members in the non-resident owning body were associated persons) or having control of the company by any other means (para (cb)) ▪ New Zealand resident company where a trustee (who meets the requirements of paras (d) or (db)) holds total ownership interests in the company of 50% or more or has control of the company by any other means (para (cc)) ▪ the trustee of a trust for which 50% or more of the value of the settlements on the trust is from settlements made by:  □ a non-resident or an associated person of a non-resident ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to ensure that a New Zealand resident trust with a New Zealand resident settlor will not be subject to the inbound thin capitalization rules just because that New Zealand resident settlor also has an interest in a non-resident company or trust. The amendment is intended to apply for income years beginning on or after the date of enactment of the Bill. □ a person described in paras (a) to (cc) or would be described by this paragraph or para (db) if settlements made, and powers of appointment or removal held, by the trustee were ignored □ group of persons (each of whom is described in paras (a) to (cc) or would be described by this paragraph or para (db) if settlements made, and powers of appointment or removal held, by the trustee were ignored) acting in concert (para (d)) ▪ the trustee of a trust where a person described in paras (a) to (cc), or would be described by this paragraph or para (d) if settlements made, and powers of appointment or removal held, by the trustee were ignored, has the power to appoint or remove a trustee other than for the purpose of protecting a security interest ▪ a New Zealand resident company with: □ an income interest in a controlled foreign company (CFC) □ an interest in a FIF that is an Australian company exempt from the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules, or  □ an interest in a FIF for which the person uses the attributable FIF income method (para (e)) ▪ a New Zealand resident company with an ownership interest of 50% or more, or control by any other means, of a company described in para (e), (para (f)), or ▪ a New Zealand resident natural person or trustee of a trust by a New Zealand resident with: □ an income interest in a CFC □ an ownership interest of at least 50% in, or control by any other means of, a company described in para (e) or (f) □ an interest in a FIF that is an Australian company exempt from the FIF rules, or □ an interest in a FIF for which the person uses the attributable FIF income method (para (g)). Special rules apply for foreign-owned banks to limit the extent to which foreign banks can debt-fund their New Zealand operations. Ownership interests A person’s ownership interest in a company is equal to the sum of: ▪ direct ownership interest held by the person ▪ direct ownership interest held by associates ▪ indirect ownership interest held by the person, and ▪ indirect ownership interest held by associates. Example: An indirect ownership interest considers the level of direct ownership in an interposed company. To illustrate:  Fig 1 — As Co X has a direct ownership interest in Co Y of 50% or greater, Co X’s indirect ownership in Co Z is equal to Co Y’s ownership interest in Co Z. Therefore Co X’s indirect ownership interest in Co Z is 100%. Fig 2 — As Co X has a direct ownership interest in Co Y of less than 50%, Co X’s indirect ownership interest in Co Z is calculated by multiplying Co X’s percentage direct ownership interest in Co Y by Co Y’s percentage ownership interest in Co Z (40% × 60%). Therefore Co X’s indirect ownership interest in Co Z is 24%. The ownership interest of Co X in Co Z still needs to be calculated in order to determine whether Co Z is subject to the thin capitalisation regime. Multiple counts of the same ownership need to be eliminated. Co Z in Fig 1 may be subject to the regime.  Interest coverage ratio method The adjustment for excess interest deductions relating to an outbound interest may be based on an interest coverage ratio instead of a debt-to-asset ratio. The eligibility criteria for the interest coverage ratio method are the following: ▪ the New Zealand group and the worldwide group both have a positive amount of adjusted net income ▪ the New Zealand group and the worldwide group both have a positive amount of net interest expense (calculated under New Zealand tax rules as if all group members were resident in New Zealand and consolidated to eliminate internal balances and transactions within the group)  ▪ the debt-to-asset ratio of the worldwide group is 75% or more, and ▪ at least 80% of debt for the worldwide group is borrowings from non-associates. The Commissioner must be notified that the interest coverage ratio method has been applied. The Commissioner must also be provided with a reconciliation of adjusted net profit to GAAP net profit and of goodwill items appearing in the GAAP balance sheet. Law: IT07 ss FE 1, FE 2, FE 5, FE 38–FE 41, YA 1; TAA s 65B  ¶26-627 New Zealand group debt percentage Under the thin capitalisation rules the deduction for interest expenditure is effectively reduced through the creation of income if the debt percentage of the business exceeds certain thresholds. The reduction occurs for: ▪ inbound investment where the applicable debt percentage of the New Zealand group debt percentage exceeds: □ 60%, and □ 110% of the debt percentage of the worldwide group ▪ outbound investment: □ where the applicable debt percentage of the New Zealand group debt percentage exceeds: — 75%, and — 110% of the debt percentage of the worldwide group □ where the ratio of net interest to adjusted net profit for the New Zealand group is more than 110% of the net interest to adjusted net profit ratio for the worldwide group or 50%.  The New Zealand group debt percentage is the percentage of total group debt to total group assets for the income or accounting year. The calculation for this purpose is calculated under generally accepted accounting practice (GAAP) for the consolidation of companies to eliminate intra-group balances by consolidating the group’s debt and assets. The New Zealand group comprises all the companies, traced tier by tier, that are identified as within the control threshold of the New Zealand parent. An election may be made by the parent for either a 50% or 66% threshold to be applied for determining control on a tierby-tier basis. If no election is made, the 66% threshold control test is deemed to apply. In the case of an outbound investment the New Zealand parent is identified by tracing ownership interests up the chain of companies on a tier-by-tier basis until no New Zealand resident company has an ownership interest of 50% or more in the last company in the chain. Note that the 110% worldwide debt threshold has been reduced to 100% for a New Zealand group controlled by a group of nonresidents acting together for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018 — see further at ¶26-620. Total group debt and total group assets Total group debt and total group assets are measured by one of three time frames that the taxpayer may elect to apply: daily, threemonthly or annually. “Total group debt” is defined as the total outstanding balances of all financial arrangements entered into by the taxpayer or another group member together with fixed-rate foreign equity, fixed-rate shares and stapled debt securities. In the case of the financial arrangements: ▪ the financial arrangement must provide funds to the taxpayer, and ▪ the taxpayer must be able to claim a deduction when calculating income in respect of the financial arrangement (apart from a deduction caused solely by currency rate movements).  The requirement as to deductibility assists the taxpayer by eliminating interest-free debt from the total group debt calculation. “Total group assets” for the income year means the aggregate of all the taxpayer’s assets or the assets of another group member, with the exception of shareholdings in controlled foreign companies (CFCs), an Australian company exempt from the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules or a FIF accounted for under the attributable FIF income method. The taxpayer may elect to measure assets by any combination of: ▪ values shown in the financial accounts of the taxpayer’s New Zealand group ▪ the net current value of the assets ▪ market value (in the case of trading stock valued at market value for the purpose of calculating income tax liability) ▪ the adjusted tax value of a personal property lease asset (in the case of a specified lease or a finance lease that is not recognised as an asset under GAAP), or ▪ a combination of financial statement values and net current values, if this approach is allowed under GAAP. Valuation of total assets, except for trading stock valued at market value and personal property lease assets, requires the application of GAAP in New Zealand. The rules for determining the New Zealand group and total assets are modified for natural persons and trustees under s FE 3. An entity cannot include its debt and assets in more than one New Zealand and worldwide group. A company is also excluded from a trust’s group if the company does not include the trust in its own group (ie the trust is not the company’s New Zealand parent under the rules). For further discussion, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 54.  In addition, increases in a company’s New Zealand group assets that arise from the sale or other transfer of assets between a member of the group and a person associated with the group must be ignored. This may or may not be another member of the group. This ensures that increases in asset values that are not recognised under GAAP in the consolidated worldwide accounts of a company cannot be recognised in the asset values of the company’s New Zealand group. Two exemptions to this rule apply. These are when GAAP would allow the increase in asset values in the absence of the transfer, or when the transfer is part of a restructure following the purchase of the group by a person not associated with the group and the change in value of the New Zealand group’s assets is a reasonable proportion of the change in the value of the group’s total assets. Note that how a company’s total assets are determined has been modified by requiring assets to be determined net of a company’s non-debt liabilities for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018 — see further at ¶26-620. Balance dates and currency conversion When the members of a taxpayer’s New Zealand group have different balance dates, the election to value total group assets and total group debt on a daily, three-monthly or annual basis is applied as if the excess debt entity’s balance date were the same as the New Zealand parent’s. Total group debt and total group assets must be calculated in New Zealand currency. Generally, any necessary currency conversions must be made at the close of trading spot exchange rate applicable on the date on which the calculation is made (see ¶26-035). Anti-avoidance Special anti-avoidance rules are provided to prevent the manipulation of values around the time at which these calculations are made. Law: IT07 ss FE 3, FE 5, FE 8, FE 10, FE 11, FE 12, FE 14–FE 16B, FE 25–FE 30, GB 51B  ¶26-630 Worldwide group debt percentage An excess debt entity’s debt percentage for its worldwide group is the percentage of total group debt to total group assets of the worldwide group. Financial accounts of the worldwide group can be used to obtain both total assets and total debt. Non-interest-bearing debt is not included (even though it might have been included under generally accepted accounting practice). Note that how a company’s total assets are determined has been modified by requiring assets to be determined net of a company’s non-debt liabilities for income years beginning on or after 1 July 2018 — see further at ¶26-620. Elections available Worldwide group debt may be measured as if the excess debt entity were resident in New Zealand. There is also an election to measure total group debt and total group assets either daily, three-monthly or annually. Debt and asset calculations must be made in New Zealand currency. Currency conversions are generally made at the close of trading spot exchange rate on the date at which the amount is being calculated (see ¶26-035). This excludes any temporary increase in total debt or total assets if those have the purpose or effect of defeating the application of the interest apportionment rules. Arbitrary worldwide group debt percentage If the excess debt entity is unable to calculate the worldwide group debt percentage, they can apply to the Commissioner to estimate the required percentage. If the taxpayer does not apply for an estimate from the Commissioner, or if the Commissioner considers that an estimate cannot be reasonably made, the figure applied is 68.1818% for inbound investment (an amount that when multiplied by 110% is equivalent to the 75% safe harbour). For outbound investment, the default percentage is 54.5454 (matching the 60% safe harbour). Owner-linked debt  When an excess debt entity (other than an outbound excess debt entity) is calculating its worldwide group debt percentage, it must generally exclude debt that is linked to an owner of the worldwide group. Some carve-outs exist to this rule, such as for minor shareholders and publicly traded debt. For further discussion, see Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 7, August 2014 at 54–56. Law: IT07 ss FE 10, FE 11, FE 12, FE 17, FE 18, FE 31  ¶26-632 Concession for on-lending when calculating group debt percentage In the calculation of a New Zealand group’s debt percentage, the amount of total group debt and total group assets is reduced by the outstanding balance of a financial arrangement if: ▪ the taxpayer or another group member enters into the financial arrangement with a person who is: □ a non-resident not carrying on a business in New Zealand through a fixed establishment and derives income that either does not have a source in New Zealand or is nonresident passive income or is relieved from New Zealand tax under an applicable tax treaty □ not associated with the taxpayer, or □ associated with the taxpayer but the person meets the criteria of s FE 2 and the person is not a member of the New Zealand group, and ▪ the financial arrangement provides funds to that person, and ▪ the consideration given for the financial arrangement is an arm’s length amount. In the calculation of the debt percentage of a worldwide group, the reduction will apply simply if the person who receives funds under the financial arrangement is not associated with the taxpayer.  Note that the “on-lending concession” also applies to trusts that hold only financial arrangements and property incidental to those financial arrangements regardless of whether the arrangement provides funds. Law: IT07 s FE 13  ¶26-634 Concession for exchange rate fluctuation when calculating group debt percentage When a financial arrangement or asset is denominated in a non-New Zealand currency, the taxpayer can elect to calculate the outstanding balance or to value the asset using the forward exchange rate applicable on the first day of the income year (instead of the more generally applied close of trading spot exchange rate on the relevant measurement date). The calculation so made is based on the measurement date that is appropriate to either the New Zealand group debt percentage or the worldwide group debt percentage. The issue of the exchange rate becomes more critical when the New Zealand dollar weakens against the relevant foreign currency. As the New Zealand currency weakens, the value of any foreign debt and the associated interest costs increase. This increase could unintentionally take the taxpayer out of the safe harbour ratio and result in a loss of interest deductibility. Law: IT07 s FE 10(2)(b)  ¶26-635 Apportionment of interest costs under thin capitalisation rules Where a taxpayer’s debt percentage exceeds one of the thresholds for an income year, the interest expense attributable to the excess debt becomes an item of income. The formula used for this purpose is contained in s FE 6, while s FE 6B sets out the formula if the threshold based on an interest coverage ratio is chosen. The formula under s FE 6 is calculated as follows:  (total deduction – mismatch + FRD − adjust) × (total debt − concession) ÷ total debt × (group debt percentage − threshold amount) ÷ group debt percentage where: total deduction is the sum of all interest deductions for which the taxpayer would be allowed a deduction under ss DB 6–DB 8 less intra-group interest and interest on financial arrangements that are not part of total group debt mismatch is the total of amounts denied as deductions under s FH 3 as unrecognised amounts under s FH 3(2) and as interest under ss FH 7 and FH 11 FRD is dividends on fixed-rate foreign equity and fixed-rate shares adjust, in the case of an outbound investment, is: □ the amount equal to total deduction plus FRD if the group interest expense does not exceed $1m □ the amount by which $2m exceeds the total group interest deduction plus FRD if they total between $1m and $2m (the de minimis rule) total debt is the total debt of the taxpayer’s New Zealand group for the income year, calculated under s FE 15 before allowing for any adjustment under s FE 13 (financial arrangements outside the group) concession is the amount, if any, deducted under s FE 13 in calculating the total group debt of the taxpayer’s New Zealand group for the income year group debt percentage is the taxpayer’s New Zealand group debt percentage for the income year, and threshold amount, as appropriate, is:  □ if the excess debt entity is an excess debt outbound company or certain trustees, the greater of: — 75%, and — 110% of the taxpayer’s worldwide debt percentage, or □ if the excess debt entity is not a trustee and not an excess debt outbound company, the greater of: — 60%, and — 110% of the taxpayer’s worldwide debt percentage, or □ if the person is an individual who is described in s FE 2(1) (g), 75%, or □ if the person is an individual who is not described in s FE 2(1)(g), 60%. An outbound investment may not be subject to an adjustment despite breach of the 75% or 110% thresholds where the value of New Zealand group assets is at least 90% of the worldwide group asset value. If there is excess debt over a wholly-owned group of companies the ensuing income may be allocated electively within the group (but not exceeding the recipient company’s interest expenditure). With effect for income years commencing on or after 1 July 2018, the formula in s FE 6 is amended to take into account the reduction in threshold from 110% to 100% for a company controlled by a group of non-residents acting together and the denial of deductions for interest under the new hybrid rules — see further at ¶26-620. An amendment in March 2020, which applies retrospectively to income years commencing on or after 1 July 2018, restricts access to the de minimis rule (no adjustments when interest is up to $1m and reduced adjustments up to $2m), so it is not available when the borrower has related party debt from a non-resident.  ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020–21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes to introduce a separate formula for calculating apportionment of interest by an excess debt entity controlled by a non-resident owning body or trustee. When the current formula in s FE 6(2) is applied to a group controlled by a nonresident owning body, it implicitly assumes that the same interest rate applies to both related-party debt and unrelated-party debt. This will often not be the case; for example, because the related-party debt and unrelated-party debt were entered into at different times. In these circumstances, interest that should be deductible (because it is paid to unrelated lenders) can be disallowed, or interest that should be disallowed (because it is paid to related lenders and the 60% debt threshold is exceeded) can remain deductible. The Bill proposes a new formula that generates an amount of income to the extent that interest is paid to related parties on debt that is above the 60% threshold. The formula essentially multiplies pre-thin capitalisation deductible related-party interest by the proportion of total debt not eligible for the on-lending concession and by the proportion of related-party debt that is deductible under the thin capitalisation rules. The proposed amendment is intended to apply from the date of enactment of the Bill. Interest coverage ratio formula Where the method chosen for the interest apportionment is based on the interest coverage ratio approach, the excess interest deduction that is income is calculated under s FE 6B as follows: net interest (NZ group ratio − threshold ratio) ÷ NZ group ratio where: net interest is the actual net interest deduction of the taxpayer (and not the group) NZ group ratio is the group’s interest–income ratio (net interest divided by adjusted net profit, being EBITA – earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation)  threshold ratio is the lesser of: □ 50%, or □ 110% of the interest-income ratio for the worldwide group. Example: AB Ltd wholly-owns XY Ltd as a foreign company and the year’s financial profile of the group comprises: ▪ $1m of net interest deductions for AB Ltd ▪ $3m of net interest deductions for the whole group ▪ $3m adjusted net profit for AB Ltd ▪ $12m adjusted net profit for the worldwide group. The formula values are: ▪ net interest: $1m ▪ NZ group ratio: 0.333 ($1m ÷ $3m) ▪ threshold ratio: 0.275 (1.1 × $3m ÷ $12m). The formula becomes: $1,000,000 ×  0.333 − 0.275 0.333  = $174,174  The $174,174 is income for AB Ltd so that the company’s net interest deduction is $825,826.  Law: IT07 ss CH 9, FE 5, FE 6, FE 6B  Hybrid and branch mismatch rules ¶26-650 Hybrid and branch mismatch rules — base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) measures Hybrid and branch mismatches are cross-border arrangements that exploit differences in the tax treatment of an entity, branch, or  instrument under the laws of two or more countries to create a tax advantage. There are a number of ways this can be achieved, including: ▪ through a payment being deductible for a payer in one country but not included as taxable income for the payee in the other country ▪ a single payment being able to be deducted against different income streams in two countries ▪ other arrangements that result in double non-taxation outcomes through the use of hybrid instruments, entities, or branches. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has made a number of recommendations as to how countries can improve their domestic rules to prevent mismatches arising and neutralise their effect when they do arise. New Zealand introduced law changes that represent a comprehensive adoption of the OECD recommendations on hybrid and branch mismatch arrangements with suitable modifications for the New Zealand context. Some of the OECD’s recommended rules are divided into “primary” and “defensive” responses. A defensive response will generally only apply if the other country affected by the arrangement does not have hybrid rules. Where there are two or more parties to a mismatch, the mismatch rules generally only apply if there is some degree of association between the relevant parties to the arrangement, or if the arrangement has been structured to achieve a mismatch. Subpart FH of the Income Tax Act 2007 now contains rules designed to address the following hybrid and branch mismatches: ▪ hybrid financial instruments ▪ disregarded hybrid payments  ▪ structures producing double deductions ▪ reverse hybrids ▪ dual resident entities ▪ imported mismatches, and ▪ deemed branch payment and payee mismatches. Guidance materials Inland Revenue released guidance material, “BEPS — Hybrid and branch mismatch rules”, in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 3, April 2019 at 38. The materials discuss each of the provisions in more detail and include examples. Law: IT07 subpart FH, ss CH 12, CX 64, DB 57B  FARMING, FISHING AND AQUACULTURE Farming  ¶27-010  Income Equalisation Schemes  ¶27-065  Development Expenditure  ¶27-165  Livestock  ¶27-220  Livestock Valuation  ¶27-235  Horse Breeding (Bloodstock)  ¶27-300  Aquaculture and Fishing  ¶27-350  Horticulture  ¶27-380  Beekeeping  ¶27-505  FARMING ¶27-010 Income from farming Income from carrying on a farming or agricultural business is to be included as part of the assessable income of a taxpayer. Whether an activity is a farming or agricultural business depends on whether the activity or enterprise constitutes a business for tax purposes and whether the business is carried on for farming or agricultural purposes. When a business is a business for tax purposes, there must be an intention by the person to make a profit or a reasonable prospect that the person will make a profit. See ¶5172 and ¶5-175. Farming or agricultural business  Inland Revenue accepts that soil cultivation, cropping or animal husbandry, growing plants, shrubs or flowers, growing fruit or grapes, beekeeping, poultry farming, sharemilking and running an orchard are activities carried on for farming or agricultural purposes. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 13, May 1995 at 15–16. Income In addition to the net profit derived from a farming business, the income of a farmer includes: ▪ the market value of meat and produce taken by a sole trader or a partner in a partnership from the farm for private or domestic purposes (see “Question we’ve been asked” QB 14/01: “Income tax — adjustments for trading stock (including raw materials) taken for own use or consumption” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 3, April 2014 at 73)) ▪ grazing fees ▪ stud fees ▪ compensation for condemned livestock and hail damage ▪ payments received for non-compliance with covenant to repair ▪ insurance proceeds on account of stock or crop losses ▪ proceeds from the sale of minerals and timber ▪ income equalisation deposit refunds plus interest ▪ livestock and unsold wool or other produce on hand at balance date ▪ prize money won at agricultural shows ▪ income from the provision of farm holidays or other tourist accommodation  ▪ depreciation recovered on the sale of farming assets, and ▪ other income (interest, dividends, etc). Law: IT07 s CB 1  ¶27-011 Sale and purchase of farm and assets There are a number of tax consequences to consider when a farm is purchased or sold. When acquiring or selling a farm it is preferable that values are assigned to the assets in the sale and purchase agreement to forestall any possible disputes on individual values for taxation purposes. Standing timber A sale and purchase agreement should include the value of any standing timber. Proceeds from the sale of standing timber (including the sale of land with standing timber) are included as income by the vendor. The year in which a deduction for standing timber may be allocated is determined in accordance with s DP 11. See ¶28-014 and ¶28-024. Buildings A separate value should be assigned to each building on the farm. Although most buildings had a 0% annual depreciation rate from the 2011–12 to 2019–20 income years, they were still depreciable property such that a disposal could give rise to depreciation recovery income. With effect from the 2020–21 income year, non-residential buildings with an estimated useful life of 50 years or more have a depreciation rate of 2% diminishing value or 1.5% straight line. See ¶13-410. Any depreciation recovered on the sale of buildings is taxable to the vendor. Consumables Consumables include, among other things, materials such as fencing materials, ear tags, drenches and fertilisers (for fertilisers see ¶27015). Although the sale of consumable aids creates income for the vendor and a deduction for the purchaser, the deduction available  under the general permission is reduced by any unexpired expenditure at the end of the income year. See further at ¶9-011. Farm development expenditure The benefit of unamortised farm development expenditure can usually be passed on to the future owner. See ¶27-175. A purchaser might wish to ensure that these values are included as a warranty in the sale and purchase agreement. This will help to authenticate any future claims made. From a vendor’s point of view, the existence of unamortised expenditure could enhance the sale. There is no recovery of development expenditure on sale of the farm as there is with depreciable assets. Sale of growing crops Generally, growing crops form part of the land until severed and are not included by the vendor as income. Whether a payment for unharvested crops in existence at the time of sale of land is income depends on the treatment of the purchase price in the sale and purchase agreement. Inland Revenue has stated that where the crop has a price that is shown separately in the sale and purchase agreement, that price is income to the vendor and the purchaser can claim an equivalent deduction. If no separate price is assigned in the agreement to growing crops, the total crop proceeds will be income to the purchaser when the crop is harvested and sold. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 4, No 4, November 1992 at 8, and Case T1 (1997) 18 NZTC 8,001. Financial arrangements rules The sale and purchase of a farm property can have financial arrangements rules implications where there is a deferred settlement involved. This does not include short-term agreements for the sale and purchase of property because they are classified as excepted financial arrangements. See ¶6-065. If no financing element is intended in relation to a deferred property settlement, the sale and purchase agreement should contain a clause specifying that the price stated in the agreement is the lowest price that the parties would have agreed on at the time at which the agreement was  entered into, on the basis of payment in full at the time at which the first right in the property is to be transferred. Such a clause protects the vendor’s position. Where a clause like this is omitted, the purchaser could get a notional interest deduction for part of the purchase price of what would normally be considered a capital payment. See ¶6-400. The Commissioner has also set out her position on the income tax treatment of facilitation payments to farmers – being payments made by a lender (typically a bank) to a farmer to assist in the sale of the farmer’s business or assets in order for the farmer to settle their debt with the lender – in Commissioner’s statement CS 21/01, “Income tax treatment of facilitation payments to farmers and debt remission on settlement of a loan”. A facilitation payment will be taxable income to the farmer under the financial arrangements rules. In addition, if there is any forgiveness of the debt by the lender, in full or in part, this may also result in remission of debt income to the borrower under that loan agreement. GST considerations Taxable supplies wholly or partly consisting of land are zero-rated (subject to GST at the rate of 0%) if: ▪ the recipient is GST-registered and intends to use the land for making taxable supplies, and ▪ the land is not intended to be used as a principal place of residence by the recipient or a relative of the recipient. See ¶32-505. When buying or selling a farming property, it is still generally preferable to use the wording “plus GST (if any)” in the sale and purchase agreement. This fixes the consideration received and payable by both parties net of GST (assuming that the purchaser is GST-registered and can recover any GST impost). However, a GSTregistered purchaser who anticipates claiming a secondhand goods input tax credit (see ¶32-056) in respect of a purchase might insist  on “GST-inclusive” wording to protect their position, should it transpire that the transaction is in fact subject to GST. Any purchaser buying property that includes a dwelling needs to be aware that the supply will be apportioned between the supply of the land and the supply of the dwelling and that the purchaser may have to pay GST on that portion of the price relating to the dwelling if the vendor has previously claimed an input credit (or adjustment) on it where the price in the sale and purchase agreement is “plus GST” or “plus GST (if any)”. See ¶27-061 and ¶32-555. Any person selling a farming operation as a going concern (rather than as a zero-rated supply of land) must specify that fact in writing (preferably within the sale and purchase agreement) and should consider using “plus GST (if any)” pricing. The requirements for the transfer of a going concern are set out more particularly at ¶32-035.  ¶27-013 Sale of timber The general principle is that a farmer who harvests a woodlot situated on the farmer’s farm returns as income the amounts realised from the timber sales, with a corresponding deduction being available for the cost of the timber. See ¶28-014 and ¶28-024. Law: IT07 ss CB 24, DP 11  ¶27-015 Deductions for farmers Farmers can claim the normal deductions allowed in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving income. There are additional deductions a full-time farmer can claim. These are set out below. Aircraft expenses A deduction is permitted for running costs and depreciation in respect of the use of an aircraft for farming purposes. Any apportionment between farming and private use should be based on the total number of flying hours devoted to farming purposes in proportion to total flying hours for the year as recorded in the aircraft’s logbook. The costs of obtaining a pilot’s licence are not  considered by the Commissioner to be deductible, this being an item of capital or private expenditure. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 14, June 1995 at 24. Note that if an aircraft is used for both business and private purposes and the aircraft cost $50,000 or more, or has a market value on date of acquisition of $50,000 or more if it was not acquired at market value, from the 2014–15 income year expenditure incurred on that aircraft may be subject to apportionment under the new mixed-use asset rules in subpart DG. See ¶10-035. Note also that, with effect from the 2017–18 income year, new provisions have been introduced relating to the timing of aircraft engine overhaul deductions. See ¶10-127. Compensation for sheep-worrying damage The Commissioner permits a farmer a deduction for any compensation paid for any sheep-worrying damage the farmer’s working dogs might have done (assuming the particular facts showed this was an ordinary incident of business). The compensation is returned as income by the sheep owner recipient. Dairy farming expenditure Certain dairy farming expenditure may be deductible under the general permission, or under s DO 1 or DO 4 (see ¶27-165 and ¶27175). An interpretation statement, IS0025, “Dairy farming — deductibility of certain expenditure”, sets out the Commissioner’s view on the deductibility of a number of expenditure items relating to operating a dairy farm. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 2, February 2000 at 10. The Commissioner’s conclusions can be summarised as follows: ▪ subject to some exceptions, the cost of replacing a single component of milking plant (eg a pump or the pulsator units) is generally deductible ▪ some components of a milking plant are non-deductible capital items, because they are unlikely to be replaced other than as  part of an upgrade (eg stainless steel pipe work and milk filters) ▪ where a number of milking plant components are upgraded at the same time, the cost is usually on capital account and not deductible ▪ the cost of replacing an inlet race is a capital expense; see QB 12/01: “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure on replacing and extending an inlet race to a dairy shed”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 2, March 2012 at 19 ▪ the cost of replacing either the rotary platform system or the drive mechanism of the rotary platform is a non-deductible capital expense ▪ the cost of replacing the electric motor in a rotary platform system is deductible ▪ the piping used in a dairy shed complex is not a fence for the purposes of s DO 1 or DO 4 ▪ the piping surrounds are part of the dairy shed complex comprising the shed and adjoining yard ▪ the cost of replacing overhead power lines to the dairy shed with an underground system of power is a capital expense and not deductible, and ▪ the cost of a cattle stop constructed in an opening in a fence is deductible; see QB 12/03: “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure on cattle stops”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 22. Farm dwelling costs prior to 2017–18 income year Note that prior to the 2017–18 income year, Inland Revenue allowed a number of long-standing concessions. However, these concessions were withdrawn with effect from the 2017–18 income year, following Inland Revenue's release of an interpretation  statement, IS 17/02, “Income tax — deductibility of farmhouse expenses”, discussed below. For a discussion of the position prior to the 2017–18 income year, see CCH, 2017 New Zealand Master Tax Guide. Farm dwelling costs for 2017–18 and later income years In March 2017, Inland Revenue released interpretation statement IS 17/02, “Income tax — deductibility of farmhouse expenses” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 4, May 2017 at 82). The statement withdrew and replaced a number of concessions for farmers with effect from the beginning of a farmer’s 2017–18 income year. The statement notes that the former concessions had permitted some farmers to claim deductions for private expenditure. The statement confirms that deductions for farmhouse expenses are available only to the extent that they are incurred in carrying on the farming business. The previous distinction between a full-time and part-time farmer has been removed. The expenses must satisfy the general permission, ie they must have the necessary relationship both with the taxpayer concerned and the carrying on of the farming business. If an expense satisfies the general permission, it may still not be deductible due to the application of the general limitations. For farmhouse expenses, the private limitation may apply where the person incurring the expense lives in the farmhouse. When a person does live in the farmhouse, any expense incurred on that farmhouse must be apportioned between business and private use based on the facts in that case. Apportionment methods The statement states that, generally, for all farming businesses, where it is possible to dissect an expense into deductible and nondeductible amounts, that method should be used first. Where an expense relates to both the business and private use of the farmhouse, dissection may be impractical or impossible. In this situation, the expense will need to be apportioned on some fair and reasonable basis between the business and private portions of the expense. Apportionment will be necessary when a farmer lives in the farmhouse and uses part of it for business purposes. This will  generally arise, for example, when sole traders and partners of partnerships live in the farmhouse. The Commissioner considers that apportionment of farmhouse expenses based on time and space would generally be an appropriate method. This is consistent with other businesses. On the other hand, some expenses will be incurred on the farm as a whole (including the farmhouse). In this situation, the proportion of the expenses that relate to the private use of the farmhouse must be determined. The Commissioner considers that an appropriate method of apportionment in that situation is one that is based on the value of the farmhouse (being the value of the farmhouse, curtilage and improvements to the farmhouse) as a proportion of the total value of the farm and improvements. This is because an apportionment based on time and space might not provide an accurate division between expenses that relate to the farmhouse and expenses that relate to the rest of the farm. The Commissioner will accept a formal valuation or a reasonable estimate of the values of the farmhouse (including curtilage and improvements) and farm. The relative costs of the farm and farmhouse may be a reliable approximation of value at a particular point in time. Prescribed levels of deductions for certain taxpayers For larger farming businesses carried on by sole traders and partners in partnerships, the farmhouse may represent a very small proportion of the overall cost of the farm. In this situation, the private element of any expenses will be minimal. However, the compliance costs associated with calculating deductions for interest and other farmhouse expenses outweigh the tax consequences of any deductions available. Accordingly, the statement sets out circumstances in which the Commissioner will accept prescribed levels of deductions for farmhouse expenses incurred by sole traders and partners who live in the farmhouse. This is instead of always requiring deductions for farmhouse expenses to be based on actual use. The approach is based on a distinction between:  ▪ farming businesses where the value of the farmhouse (including curtilage and improvements) is 20% or less of the total value of the farm (Type 1 farms), and ▪ farming businesses where the value of the farmhouse (including curtilage and improvements) is more than 20% of the total value of the farm (Type 2 farms). The value of the farmhouse (including curtilage and improvements) and farm can be used to determine the extent of the private use of the farmhouse. The Commissioner will accept a formal valuation or a reasonable estimate of the values of the farmhouse (including curtilage and improvements) and farm. To reduce compliance costs, the respective costs of the farmhouse and farm may also be used to determine whether the farm is a Type 1 or Type 2 farm. Farmers who live in the farmhouse on Type 1 farms may do an actual use calculation if they consider that the business use of the farmhouse is greater than 20%. However, the Commissioner will also accept that 20% of the farmhouse is used for business purposes without any supporting evidence. As a result, such farmers can claim 20% of all farmhouse expenses as deductible business expenses. In addition, these farmers may continue to claim 100% of the interest costs relating to the farmhouse and 100% of rates. For farmers who live in the farmhouse on Type 2 farms, there is no minimum percentage and they must determine whether expenses are deductible under the general permission and general limitations as set out in the statement, ie they must claim deductions relating to the actual business use of the farmhouse. Telephone rental and fixed line charges Farmers who operate their business from home may claim 50% of their telephone rental charges, unless they can show that the actual business use of the telephone is greater than 50%. This is the existing practice for other home-based businesses. The above can be summarised in the following table:  Farm type  Interest and rates charges  General farmhouse expenses  Fixed line telephone charges  Type 1 farms  100% deduction for rates and interest expenses relating to the farm, including the farmhouse.  Dissection where possible, then 20% deduction unless the taxpayer can substantiate a higher deduction.  50% of telephone rental charges used for both business and private purposes, unless the taxpayer can show that 50% is too low.  Type 2 farms  Dissection where possible, then apportion between farm and farmhouse on a fair and reasonable basis. Deduct amounts attributable to actual business use of the farmhouse.  50% of telephone rental charges used for both business and private purposes, unless the taxpayer can show that 50% is too low.  Summary of deductibility of farmhouse expenses The statement also discusses the deductibility of farmhouse expenses incurred by a person not living in a farmhouse. The following table summarises the deductibility of farmhouse expenses in a number of different situations. The table does not include reimbursement payments made by a farming entity to the occupiers of the farmhouse for purely business-related expenditure. This will usually be deductible.  Entity/structure  Partnership or sole trader owns/leases and operates farm  Interest  Other expenses  Sole trader or partner lives in the farmhouse Apportionment is required. Determine whether the farm is a Type 1 or Type 2 farm and use appropriate method (see above table). For Type 1, 100% deductible.  Sole trader or partner lives in the farmhouse Apportionment is required. Determine whether the farm is a Type 1 or Type 2 farm and use appropriate method (see above table).  Farmhouse provided to employee 100% deductible.  Farmhouse provided to employee 100% deductible.  Farmhouse rented at market value 100% deductible.  Farmhouse rented at market value 100% deductible.  Farmhouse provided for no consideration to someone who is not an employee No expenses are deductible.  Farmhouse provided for no consideration to someone who is not an employee No expenses are deductible.  Company owns 100% deductible where Farmhouse provided and operates requirements of s DB 7 to employee farm met. 100% deductible. Farmhouse provided to shareholder (not an employee) Not deductible as a dividend.  Entity/structure  Interest  Other expenses Farmhouse rented at market value 100% deductible. Farmhouse provided for no consideration to someone who is not a shareholder or employee No expenses are deductible.  Trust owns and operates farm (trading trust)  Sole trader, partnership, company or trust owns farm, and farmhouse is leased to another entity at market value  Farmhouse provided to employee 100% deductible.  Farmhouse provided to employee 100% deductible.  Farmhouse rented at market value 100% deductible.  Farmhouse rented at market value 100% deductible.  Farmhouse provided to beneficiary who is not an employee No expenses are deductible.  Farmhouse provided to beneficiary who is not an employee No expenses are deductible.  100% deductible for the lessor.  100% deductible for the lessor. Lessee (natural person carrying on the farming business) must apportion rent and other expenses. Determine whether the farm is a Type 1 or Type 2 farm and use appropriate method.  The statement also includes a number of useful examples. Sharemilkers and contract milkers In May 2018, Inland Revenue released a Question We’ve Been Asked, QB 18/09, “Income tax — can sharemilkers and contract milkers deduct farmhouse expenditure using the approach in IS 17/02?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 30, No 6, July 2018 at 4). The item concludes that sharemilkers and contract milkers may use the approach in IS 17/02 to claim a 20% deduction for farmhouse expenditure without calculating actual business use of the farmhouse if: ▪ they carry on a sharemilking or contract-milking business as sole traders or a partnership independent from the farm owner’s business ▪ the business is of sufficient scale to require its own home office and centre of operations in the sharemilker’s or contract milker’s farmhouse, and ▪ the sharemilker’s or contract milker’s farmhouse is used in a similar manner to, and extent as, other farmhouses on type 1 farms. Farm sundries There are many other materials that a farmer might purchase to meet ordinary and continuous farming requirements. Examples include stock feed, twine, dip and drenches. The Commissioner takes the view that because these sorts of items are not purchased for resale they do not have to be treated as trading stock. For example, any hay acquired upon the purchase of a farm (or acquired during the year for stock feed) is allowed as a deduction when it is possible to attribute a value to the hay. The deduction is available on the basis that it is necessary for the proper carrying on of the farming business. See Case E98 (1982) 5 NZTC 59,522. The prepayments rules apply to purchases of farming sundries. See further at ¶9-011 and ¶10-052.  Fertiliser and lime The deduction available for expenditure incurred in the acquisition or application of fertiliser or lime may be spread over all or any of the four income years after the income year in which that expenditure was incurred in the proportions the farmer chooses. The concession is exercisable upon the farmer giving the Commissioner notice that the farmer is electing to take advantage of the concession. ▸ Note: The Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill, introduced into Parliament on 4 June 2020, proposes an amendment to clarify that the notice requirements for the concession will be satisfied when the taxpayer files their tax return on that basis. The amendment is intended to apply from 1 April 2020 for the 2020–21 and later income years. It should be emphasised that the option is an alternative to claiming the deduction outright (ie the farmer has the option of spreading the deduction over the four-year period or claiming all of it in the year in which the expenditure was incurred). If a farmer who has made an election to spread the deduction dies or ceases to carry on the farming business before the deduction spread is complete, the balance of undeducted expenditure may be allocated to the income year in which the farmer ceases to carry on the farming business or equally over the income years covering the income year in which the expenditure was incurred and the subsequent income years up until the farming business ceased. Where two persons are in a partnership and one withdraws, the continuing party’s share of the cost of any unexpended balance of fertiliser or lime is allowed against that person’s income in the remaining years of election. The withdrawing partner will generally be subject to the cessation of business provisions (see ¶23-050), unless that person commences farming independently. In such a case, the ex-partner’s share of the remaining cost can be claimed against individual farming income in the remaining years of election. Inland Revenue released Determination DEP 81: “Fertiliser storage facilities and remedial matters relating to the depreciation of buildings and grandparented structures”, following the issue of  interpretation statement IS 10/02, “Meaning of ‘building’ in the depreciation provisions” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 5, June 2010 at 24). The statement concluded that a building is a structure that has walls and a roof, is of considerable size, is meant to last a considerable period of time and is generally fixed to the land on which it stands. A building is a structure that can function independently of any other but is not necessarily a physically separate structure. The effect of IS 10/02 is that some assets that were not previously regarded as buildings now come within the meaning of “buildings”. Those assets include barns, including drying barns, and fertiliser works. Assets that were acquired, or for which a binding contract was entered into for their purchase or construction, on or before 30 July 2009 continue to be treated as structures for depreciation purposes. DEP 81 clarified that the existing rates continue to apply to the grandparented structures and set general depreciation rates for fertiliser storage facilities that are associated with fertiliser works, by adding a new asset class in the “Building and structures” asset category. Fertiliser storage facilities are buildings within the definition of “building” in IS 10/02 and they have an estimated useful life of 33.3 years. Grass Regrassing and fertilising expenditure that is part of a significant capital activity (as defined in s YA 1, see ¶27-165) should be capitalised and amortised. All other regrassing and fertilising expenditure is fully deductible in the year incurred. Pasture that has an estimated useful life of one year or less is specifically excluded from the capital treatment. Also excluded from the capital account treatment are costs associated with changes in the intensity of farming activities. See Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5, June 2006 at 123. Legal expenses The Commissioner allows a deduction for legal expenses incurred in raising a mortgage to buy farm property or in borrowing money for farming purposes. A deduction is also allowed for any legal  expenses incurred in buying any other farm assets. However, unless s DB 62 applies (see below) no deduction is permitted for legal costs, such as conveyancing fees, incurred in acquiring the asset. Also allowed as a deduction are any legal expenses incurred in connection with the initial entering into or subsequent renewal of lease of farm property or farm assets. Legal costs incurred in the preparation of sharemilking agreements are also deductible. A farmer, carrying on a business, is entitled to utilise the provision related to business-related legal expenses under s DB 62 that allows total legal expenses up to $10,000 incurred in an income year to be fully deductible in that year. The deduction provision in s DB 62 overrides the capital limitation. The subject of legal expenses generally is considered at ¶10-680. Motor vehicles The deduction available to a farmer for motor vehicle expenses is no different from deductions for any other person. When a farmer reimburses an employee, the farmer generally will have three choices. These are reimbursing expenditure, providing an allowance, or making a payment based on mileage rates. For more detail, see ¶3-445 and ¶10-710. Repairs and maintenance The deduction available to a farmer for repairs and maintenance expenses is no different from deductions for any other person. For more detail, see ¶10-840. Note that the cost of widening or metalling a farm road or track is a capital expenditure. See QB 12/04: “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure on widening or metalling a farm access road or track”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 26. Stock dips, stockyards and fences The Commissioner allows a deduction for any repairs and maintenance to stock dips, stockyards and fences under general principles (see above “Repairs and maintenance”). Expenditure constructing a stockyard that is not an integral part of a wider asset is deductible in the year in which it is incurred. However,  where a stockyard is an integral part of a wider asset such as a dairy shed or shearing shed, a deduction is not available. See QB 12/05: “Income tax — deductibility of expenditure on stock yards”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 24, No 4, May 2012 at 29. Levies, newspapers and subscriptions A farmer is also allowed a deduction for: ▪ levies paid by meat producers, wool growers and maize growers to their respective producer boards ▪ levies paid by growers to ENZA (formerly the Apple and Pear Marketing Board) ▪ the cost of any newspapers, magazines or journals that provide stock reports or other farming information, and ▪ subscriptions to any organisation that is connected to farming (eg Federated Farmers and local A & P associations). Tree planting expenses Limited deductions in respect of expenditure incurred by farmers in planting or maintaining trees on the land are permitted under s DO 3. For these deductions to apply, the farming or agricultural business must be the principal business undertaken on that land. The deductions are limited to the lesser of the amount of the tree planting expenses or the tree maintenance expenses incurred and $7,500 (ie a maximum deduction of $7,500 is allowed for each type of expense). That part of the expenditure which exceeds $7,500 is either amortised (for trees not intended for timber production) or capitalised to a cost of timber account in the case of forestry plantings. The section does not apply to trees planted under a forestry encouragement agreement, trees planted mainly to produce fruit, or trees for which a deduction is allowed under s DO 2 (trees planted for erosion, shelter and water protection — see ¶27-165).  In effect, s DO 3 applies only to ornamental trees and, perhaps, to woodlot operations where the farmer is not in the business of forestry. Where a farmer carries on a forestry business, but the farmer’s farming or agricultural business is still the principal business undertaken on that land, the farmer in question could claim the expenditure either under s DP 1 (see ¶28-030) or DO 3. A farmer would claim under s DP 1 where the expenditure exceeded $7,500. Law: IT07 ss DA 1, DB 62, DO 1–DO 4, DO 11, EA 3, EE 48(3), EJ 3, sch 20  ¶27-030 Wages paid by farmer to spouse, civil union partner or de facto partner Restrictions are imposed on the wages a farmer may pay his or her spouse, de facto or civil union partner for farm work duties. These restrictions are the same as those imposed on any other person who pays a wage to a spouse, de facto or civil union partner. Special arrangements need to be made settling the amount of the deduction that the farmer is entitled to claim if the farmer wishes to employ his or her spouse, de facto or civil union partner to cook for employees. To be able to claim the deduction, the farmer must satisfy the normal obligations required of employers. A completed form IR 330 must be obtained and PAYE tax deductions and accident compensation levies must be made and accounted for in the proper manner. Before claiming a deduction for wages paid for services, the farmer must satisfy the Commissioner that the payment is for genuine services (not being domestic services or services performed in connection with the home), was exclusively incurred in the production of the income of the farmer and approval for the deduction was granted by the Commissioner before claiming the deduction. Note, however, that the Commissioner may approve a deduction for amounts a farmer pays their spouse or partner to cook for farm employees.  The above is subject to s GB 23, which provides the Commissioner with broad powers to reallocate income and losses between parties where she considers that excessive salary or wages have been paid. See also “Question We’ve Been Asked” QB 14/09: “Income Tax — Meaning of ‘Excessive Remuneration’ and ‘Excessive Profits or Losses’ Paid or Allocated to Relatives, Partners, Shareholders or Directors” that discusses the application of s GB 23 (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 26, No 9, October 2014 at 22). A similar rule is contained in s DB 57 in respect of payments other than for services made to a spouse, civil union or de facto partner. QB 19/01 In March 2019, Inland Revenue released QB 19/01, “What are the requirements for claiming tax deductions for payments to family members for services?” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31, No 4, May 2019 at 149). The item states that to claim a tax deduction for payments to family members for services: ▪ the family member must provide services to your business ▪ the amount paid must not be excessive, and �