Completing the Switch Hnry and Zapier Integration Guide. Hnry and Zapier Integration Guide. Zapier is an online service that lets you automate your work by connecting different apps and services together. Using our Zapier beta, you can integrate with 3,000+ apps to automatically create Invoices and Clients, raise Expenses, and add Items to existing Invoices within Hnry.Get started by following the steps below! Step 1 - Sign up for ZapierIf you don’t already have a Zapier account, create one for free here.If you already have a Zapier account, start by logging in here. Step 2 - Create a ZapA 'zap' is any automated task built-in Zapier.The easiest way to get started is by trying out some of our pre-made example integrations here. We have example integrations with Toggl, FreshBooks, Pipedrive, and more. Custom WorkflowYou can also create a zap your own custom workflow to suit your needs. A zap is composed of triggers and actions. Whenever a trigger event occurs, a corresponding action is executed. Below we walk through a typical example of configuring a zap. In the example, we'll create a time tracking zap that automatically adds Items to a Hnry Invoice when time entries are logged in Toggl. To get started with this zap you’ll need a Toggl account, or you can use any other time tracking app supported by Zapier. Note: if you would like to use this particular zap there is already a pre-made template for you. Setting up the triggerLog in to your Zapier account and go to the Zap Editor.Search for Toggl.3. For the trigger event, select ‘New Time Entry’. 4. To connect your Toggl account, you will first need to log into Toggl. Head to your profile page and scroll to the ‘API Token’ section at the bottom. Copy this token and paste it into the popup:  5. Set up the trigger. The fields can be left blank or you can fill them in so that new invoice items are only created for specific workspaces, tasks, or tags within Toggl.  6. Test your Toggl trigger by clicking the ‘Test trigger’ button in Zapier. If you have no previous time entries in Toggl, you will need to create a time entry in order to test this trigger (or you can skip the test).  The trigger is now complete and you can move on to setting up the action.Setting up the actionIn Zapier, look up Hnry in the search bar. 2. Select ‘Add Item to Existing Invoice’.  3. Next, you’ll need to connect your Hnry account to Zapier. After clicking ‘Choose an account…’, you’ll be asked to log in to your Hnry profile and authorise the integration. This allows Zapier to view, edit, and create expenses, clients, and invoices on your behalf. Click ‘Confirm’ to proceed. 4. Configure the data that you want from Hnry in your trigger. You’ll need to select the invoice you want your invoice items to be added to from the dropdown menu (only draft invoices are shown). You'll also need to configure the quantity, description, and price of the invoice items. Here is an example of the filled out fields:  With the fields configured as above, whenever you log a time entry in Toggl, an invoice item will be added to the invoice with invoice number INV-123319. The invoice item will have the same description as the time entry in Toggl and the quantity of the invoice item will be set to the duration in hours of the time entry logged. 5. Test your action by clicking ‘Test action’ then clicking ‘Test & Continue’. If it worked, you should see something similar to the screenshot below and an invoice item would have been added to your chosen invoice in Hnry.  6. All that's left for you to do is turn on the Zap! Once you click 'Turn on Zap,' the zap will be live and activate every time the trigger fires. Once the zap is on, you can freely log time in Toggl and invoice items will automatically be saved to the selected invoice. When you are finished logging time to an invoice and want to move on to another, simply come back to Zapier and change the invoice in the dropdown. If you have any questions or require further clarification, please do not hesitate to get in touch with the support team at support@hnry.com.au. We will be more than happy to help.Did this answer your question?
