How to Set Up an Allocation: StakeHow to Set Up an Allocation: Stake. How to set up an allocation to go to a Stake account. With Hnry's "Allocations" feature, you can set aside a percentage of your income to be deducted each time you get paid. You can choose to set up as many Allocations as you'd like and at any percentage you'd like, so long as your total Allocations don't exceed 45% of your income.  Here are some of the current Allocations we offer:  To set up an Allocation with our investment friends at Stake, you'll need to indicate the percentage and give your Stake Reference Number. Follow these simple steps to set up a Hnry Allocation to Stake:  If you do not yet have a Stake account: First, you'll need to set up an account with Stake. The process only takes a few minutesYou'll need to be at least 18 years of age. Once you're all set up, you'll need a Stake Reference Number to start allocating money directly into your Stake deposit account.  To find this Reference Number, access your Wallet from within the Stake app and then click "Top up with bank deposit."  You'll then be brought to a screen that displays all of your necessary Stake information. Your Stake Reference will be the part of your transfer detail you see. If you already have a Stake account:Go to your Stake Wallet and find your Reference under the section where you'd typically top up your WalletEnter this in the Allocations window on the Hnry appOnce your payment clears through Hnry and your money is in your bank account, that portion of the income you’d Allocated will be waiting in your Stake Wallet, ready to be invested. Note: the money might take a couple of days to appear in your Stake Wallet.  Few things to note; There is a minimum transfer amount into your stake account of $50AUD. The transactions go into your Wall St wallet. If you want to trade ASX, you'll have to transfer that within Stake. If you have any questions regarding Stake and how to Allocate money between platforms, feel free to reach out to support@hnry.com.au. Did this answer your question?
