Hnry is a service for contractors, freelancers, sole traders and self-employed individuals that takes away all the hassle of tax and compliance as well as providing you with the necessary tools to manage any additional financial admin.  As New Zealand's fastest-growing accountancy, we pay all your taxes and file any associated tax returns for you, giving you peace of mind that you're always up to date and on top of your financial obligations. The Hnry Service works in 3 parts:1. The Hnry Bank AccountWhen you sign up for Hnry, you're given your own unique Hnry Bank Account to have all your self-employed income paid in to.  As soon as your Clients pay you into your Bank Account, we automatically calculate, deduct and pay exactly the right amount of all of your taxes (Income Tax, levies, GST, and Student Loan) before immediately passing the remainder on to a personal Bank Account of your choice, along with a breakdown of your deductions (payslip).  When the time comes, we file all your Income Tax and GST returns for you - all at no extra cost! No more danger of dipping into your tax money, no more spreadsheets, online calculators and manual payments, no more Provisional Tax payments; no more hassle!  2. The Hnry AppAs a Hnry customer, you also have access to our app, which is packed full of useful features for the self-employed:  Optional features include; Being able to create and send Quotes and Invoices your clients (we'll even chase your outstanding invoices for you if your customers are late paying)Use the system to raise Business and Home Office Expenses. Our team will review them and make sure you get the right tax relief on your expenses straight away, rather than needing to wait until the end of the financial yearRecord any Assets you have (we take care of the depreciation for you)Reports including Payslips, and Income & Expenditure reports Use the Allocations feature to manage where you would like your payments to go as and when you get paid e.g. money into savings, investments, your Gran...You can also download a mobile version of the Hnry app to have on-the-go. 3. The Hnry TeamYou don't just get a Hnry Bank Account and some software, you also get access to our specialist team. The Hnry team are experts in self-employed tax, and we're always on hand to answer your questions or help out. We can even help you get set up with new clients or recruiters you might be working for. Hnry is a registered tax agent for both ACC and IRD, and we also represent you to both of those agencies (meaning no more time wasted sitting on hold). If you're ready to take the next step, it's free to sign up to Hnry and look around, and we don't charge you any fees until you actually start getting paid into your Hnry Bank Account.
